the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy

douglas adams

for jonny brock and clare gorst
and all other arlingtonians for
tea, sympathy and a sofa

far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the west-
ern spiral arm of the galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow sun. orbiting
this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is an utterly insigni-
cant little blue green planet whose ape-descended life forms are so amazingly
primitive that they still think digital watches are a pretty neat idea.

this planet has  or rather had  a problem, which was this: most of the
people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time. many solutions were
suggested for this problem, but most of these were largely concerned with the
movements of small green pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole
it wasnt the small green pieces of paper that were unhappy.

and so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and most of

them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches.

many were increasingly of the opinion that theyd all made a big mistake
in coming down from the trees in the rst place. and some said that even the
trees had been a bad move, and that no one should ever have left the oceans.
and then, one thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man had
been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice to people
for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in rickmansworth
suddenly realized what it was that had been going wrong all this time, and she
nally knew how the world could be made a good and happy place. this time
it was right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to anything.
sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone about it, a

terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost forever.

this is not her story.
but it is the story of that terrible stupid catastrophe and some of its

consequences.

it is also the story of a book, a book called the hitchhikers guide to the
galaxy  not an earth book, never published on earth, and until the terrible
catastrophe occurred, never seen or heard of by any earthman.

nevertheless, a wholly remarkable book.
in fact it was probably the most remarkable book ever to come out of the
great publishing houses of ursa minor  of which no earthman had ever heard
either.

not only is it a wholly remarkable book, it is also a highly successful one
 more popular than the celestial home care omnibus, better selling than
fifty more things to do in zero gravity, and more controversial than oolon
colluphids trilogy of philosophical blockbusters where god went wrong,
some more of gods greatest mistakes and who is this god person anyway?
in many of the more relaxed civilizations on the outer eastern rim of the
galaxy, the hitchhikers guide has already supplanted the great encyclopedia
galactica as the standard repository of all knowledge and wisdom, for thoughit has many omissions and contains much that is apocryphal, or at least wildly
inaccurate, it scores over the older, more pedestrian work in two important
respects.

first, it is slightly cheaper; and secondly it has the words dont panic

inscribed in large friendly letters on its cover.

but the story of this terrible, stupid thursday, the story of its extraordi-
nary consequences, and the story of how these consequences are inextricably
intertwined with this remarkable book begins very simply.

it begins with a house.

the house stood on a slight rise just on the edge of the village. it stood on
its own and looked over a broad spread of west country farmland. not a
remarkable house by any means  it was about thirty years old, squattish,
squarish, made of brick, and had four windows set in the front of a size and
proportion which more or less exactly failed to please the eye.

the only person for whom the house was in any way special was arthur
dent, and that was only because it happened to be the one he lived in. he
had lived in it for about three years, ever since he had moved out of london
because it made him nervous and irritable. he was about thirty as well,
dark haired and never quite at ease with himself. the thing that used to
worry him most was the fact that people always used to ask him what he
was looking so worried about. he worked in local radio which he always used
to tell his friends was a lot more interesting than they probably thought. it
was, too  most of his friends worked in advertising.

on wednesday night it had rained very heavily, the lane was wet and
muddy, but the thursday morning sun was bright and clear as it shone on
arthur dents house for what was to be the last time

it hadnt properly registered with arthur that the council wanted to

knock down his house and build an bypass instead.

at eight oclock on thursday morning arthur didnt feel very good. he
woke up blearily, got up, wandered blearily round his room, opened a window,
saw a bulldozer, found his slippers, and stomped o to the bathroom to wash.

toothpaste on the brush  so. scrub.
shaving mirror  pointing at the ceiling. he adjusted it. for a moment
it reected a second bulldozer through the bathroom window. properly ad-
justed, it reected arthur dents bristles. he shaved them o, washed, dried,
and stomped o to the kitchen to nd something pleasant to put in his mouth.

kettle, plug, fridge, milk, coee. yawn.
the word bulldozer wandered through his mind for a moment in searchof something to connect with.

the bulldozer outside the kitchen window was quite a big one.
he stared at it. yellow, he thought and stomped o back to his bedroom

to get dressed.

passing the bathroom he stopped to drink a large glass of water, and
another. he began to suspect that he was hung over. why was he hung
over? had he been drinking the night before? he supposed that he must
have been. he caught a glint in the shaving mirror. yellow, he thought
and stomped on to the bedroom.

he stood and thought. the pub, he thought. oh dear, the pub. he
vaguely remembered being angry, angry about something that seemed im-
portant. hed been telling people about it, telling people about it at great
length, he rather suspected: his clearest visual recollection was of glazed
looks on other peoples faces. something about a new bypass he had just
found out about. it had been in the pipeline for months only no one seemed
to have known about it. ridiculous. he took a swig of water. it would sort
itself out, hed decided, no one wanted a bypass, the council didnt have a
leg to stand on. it would sort itself out.

god what a terrible hangover it had earned him though. he looked
at himself in the wardrobe mirror. he stuck out his tongue. yellow, he
thought. the word yellow wandered through his mind in search of something
to connect with.

fifteen seconds later he was out of the house and lying in front of a big

yellow bulldozer that was advancing up his garden path.

mr. l. prosser was, as they say, only human. in other words he was a
carbon-based life form descended from an ape. more specically he was forty,
fat and shabby and worked for the local council. curiously enough, though
he didnt know it, he was also a direct male-line descendant of genghis khan,
though intervening generations and racial mixing had so juggled his genes
that he had no discernible mongoloid characteristics, and the only vestiges
left in mr. l. prosser of his mighty ancestry were a pronounced stoutness
about the tum and a predilection for little fur hats.

he was by no means a great warrior:

in fact he was a nervous worried
man. today he was particularly nervous and worried because something had
gone seriously wrong with his job  which was to see that arthur dents
house got cleared out of the way before the day was out.

come o it, mr. dent,, he said, you cant win you know. you cant lie
in front of the bulldozer indenitely. he tried to make his eyes blaze ercely
but they just wouldnt do it.

arthur lay in the mud and squelched at him.im game, he said, well see who rusts rst.
im afraid youre going to have to accept it, said mr. prosser gripping
his fur hat and rolling it round the top of his head, this bypass has got to
be built and its going to be built!

first ive heard of it, said arthur, whys it going to be built?
mr. prosser shook his nger at him for a bit, then stopped and put it

away again.

what do you mean, whys it got to be built? he said. its a bypass.

youve got to build bypasses.

bypasses are devices which allow some people to drive from point a to
point b very fast whilst other people dash from point b to point a very fast.
people living at point c, being a point directly in between, are often given
to wonder whats so great about point a that so many people of point b are
so keen to get there, and whats so great about point b that so many people
of point a are so keen to get there. they often wish that people would just
once and for all work out where the hell they wanted to be.

mr. prosser wanted to be at point d. point d wasnt anywhere in partic-
ular, it was just any convenient point a very long way from points a, b and
c. he would have a nice little cottage at point d, with axes over the door,
and spend a pleasant amount of time at point e, which would be the nearest
pub to point d. his wife of course wanted climbing roses, but he wanted
axes. he didnt know why  he just liked axes. he ushed hotly under the
derisive grins of the bulldozer drivers.

he shifted his weight from foot to foot, but it was equally uncomfortable
on each. obviously somebody had been appallingly incompetent and he
hoped to god it wasnt him.

mr. prosser said: you were quite entitled to make any suggestions or

protests at the appropriate time you know.

appropriate time? hooted arthur. appropriate time? the rst i
knew about it was when a workman arrived at my home yesterday. i asked
him if hed come to clean the windows and he said no hed come to demolish
the house. he didnt tell me straight away of course. oh no. first he wiped
a couple of windows and charged me a ver. then he told me.

but mr. dent, the plans have been available in the local planning oce

for the last nine month.

oh yes, well as soon as i heard i went straight round to see them, yes-
terday afternoon. you hadnt exactly gone out of your way to call attention
to them had you? i mean like actually telling anybody or anything.

but the plans were on display . . . 
on display? i eventually had to go down to the cellar to nd them.
thats the display department.with a ashlight.
ah, well the lights had probably gone.
so had the stairs.
but look, you found the notice didnt you?
yes, said arthur, yes i did.

it was on display in the bottom of a
locked ling cabinet stuck in a disused lavatory with a sign on the door
saying beware of the leopard.

a cloud passed overhead. it cast a shadow over arthur dent as he lay
it cast a shadow over arthur

propped up on his elbow in the cold mud.
dents house. mr. prosser frowned at it.

its not as if its a particularly nice house, he said.
im sorry, but i happen to like it.
youll like the bypass.
oh shut up, said arthur dent. shut up and go away, and take your
bloody bypass with you. you havent got a leg to stand on and you know
it.

mr. prossers mouth opened and closed a couple of times while his mind
was for a moment lled with inexplicable but terribly attractive visions of
arthur dents house being consumed with re and arthur himself running
screaming from the blazing ruin with at least three hefty spears protruding
from his back. mr. prosser was often bothered with visions like these and
they made him feel very nervous. he stuttered for a moment and then pulled
himself together.

mr. dent, he said.
hello? yes? said arthur.
some factual information for you. have you any idea how much damage

that bulldozer would suer if i just let it roll straight over you?

how much? said arthur.
none at all, said mr. prosser, and stormed nervously o wondering
why his brain was lled with a thousand hairy horsemen all shouting at him.

by a curious coincidence, none at all is exactly how much suspicion
the ape-descendant arthur dent had that one of his closest friends was not
descended from an ape, but was in fact from a small planet in the vicinity of
betelgeuse and not from guildford as he usually claimed.

arthur dent had never, ever suspected this.
this friend of his had rst arrived on the planet some fteen earth years
previously, and he had worked hard to blend himself into earth society 
with, it must be said, some success. for instance he had spent those fteen
years pretending to be an out of work actor, which was plausible enough.he had made one careless blunder though, because he had skimped a bit
on his preparatory research. the information he had gathered had led him
to choose the name ford prefect as being nicely inconspicuous.

he was not conspicuously tall, his features were striking but not conspic-
uously handsome. his hair was wiry and gingerish and brushed backwards
from the temples. his skin seemed to be pulled backwards from the nose.
there was something very slightly odd about him, but it was dicult to say
what it was. perhaps it was that his eyes didnt blink often enough and
when you talked to him for any length of time your eyes began involuntarily
to water on his behalf. perhaps it was that he smiled slightly too broadly
and gave people the unnerving impression that he was about to go for their
neck.

he struck most of the friends he had made on earth as an eccentric, but
a harmless one  an unruly boozer with some oddish habits. for instance he
would often gatecrash university parties, get badly drunk and start making
fun of any astrophysicist he could nd till he got thrown out.

sometimes he would get seized with oddly distracted moods and stare
into the sky as if hypnotized until someone asked him what he was doing.
then he would start guiltily for a moment, relax and grin.

oh, just looking for ying saucers, he would joke and everyone would

laugh and ask him what sort of ying saucers he was looking for.

green ones! he would reply with a wicked grin, laugh wildly for a
moment and then suddenly lunge for the nearest bar and buy an enormous
round of drinks.

evenings like this usually ended badly. ford would get out of his skull
on whisky, huddle into a corner with some girl and explain to her in slurred
phrases that honestly the colour of the ying saucers didnt matter that much
really.

thereafter, staggering semi-paralytic down the night streets he would of-
ten ask passing policemen if they knew the way to betelgeuse. the policemen
would usually say something like, dont you think its about time you went
o home sir?

im trying to baby, im trying to, is what ford invariably replied on

these occasions.

in fact what he was really looking out for when he stared distractedly into
the night sky was any kind of ying saucer at all. the reason he said green
was that green was the traditional space livery of the betelgeuse trading
scouts.

ford prefect was desperate that any ying saucer at all would arrive soon
because fteen years was a long time to get stranded anywhere, particularly
somewhere as mindboggingly dull as the earth.ford wished that a ying saucer would arrive soon because he knew how
to ag ying saucers down and get lifts from them. he knew how to see the
marvels of the universe for less than thirty altairan dollars a day.

in fact, ford prefect was a roving researcher for that wholly remarkable

book the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy.

human beings are great adaptors, and by lunchtime life in the environs
of arthurs house had settled into a steady routine. it was arthurs accepted
role to lie squelching in the mud making occasional demands to see his lawyer,
his mother or a good book; it was mr. prossers accepted role to tackle
arthur with the occasional new ploy such as the for the public good talk,
the march of progress talk, the they knocked my house down once you
know, never looked back talk and various other cajoleries and threats; and
it was the bulldozer drivers accepted role to sit around drinking coee and
experimenting with union regulations to see how they could turn the situation
to their nancial advantage.

the earth moved slowly in its diurnal course.
the sun was beginning to dry out the mud arthur lay in.
a shadow moved across him again.
hello arthur, said the shadow.
arthur looked up and squinting into the sun was startled to see ford

prefect standing above him.

ford! hello, how are you?
fine, said ford, look, are you busy?
am i busy? exclaimed arthur. well, ive just got all these bulldozers
and things to lie in front of because theyll knock my house down if i dont,
but other than that . . . well, no not especially, why?

they dont have sarcasm on betelgeuse, and ford prefect often failed to
notice it unless he was concentrating. he said, good, is there anywhere we
can talk?

what? said arthur dent.
for a few seconds ford seemed to ignore him, and stared xedly into the
sky like a rabbit trying to get run over by a car. then suddenly he squatted
down beside arthur.

weve got to talk, he said urgently.
fine, said arthur, talk.
and drink, said ford. its vitally important that we talk and drink.

now. well go to the pub in the village.

he looked into the sky again, nervous, expectant.
look, dont you understand? shouted arthur. he pointed at prosser.

that man wants to knock my house down!ford glanced at him, puzzled. well he can do it while youre away cant

he? he asked.

but i dont want him to!
ah.
look, whats the matter with you ford? said arthur.
nothing. nothings the matter. listen to me  ive got to tell you the
most important thing youve ever heard. ive got to tell you now, and ive
got to tell you in the saloon bar of the horse and groom.

but why?
because you are going to need a very sti drink.
ford stared at arthur, and arthur was astonished to nd that his will
was beginning to weaken. he didnt realize that this was because of an old
drinking game that ford learned to play in the hyperspace ports that served
the madranite mining belts in the star system of orion beta.

the game was not unlike the earth game called indian wrestling, and

was played like this:

two contestants would sit either side of a table, with a glass in front of

each of them.

between them would be placed a bottle of janx spirit (as immortalized
in that ancient orion mining song oh dont give me none more of that old
janx spirit/ no, dont you give me none more of that old janx spirit/ for
my head will y, my tongue will lie, my eyes will fry and i may die/ wont
you pour me one more of that sinful old janx spirit).

each of the two contestants would then concentrate their will on the
bottle and attempt to tip it and pour spirit into the glass of his opponent 
who would then have to drink it.

the bottle would then be relled. the game would be played again. and

again.

once you started to lose you would probably keep losing, because one of

the eects of janx spirit is to depress telepsychic power.

as soon as a predetermined quantity had been consumed, the nal loser

would have to perform a forfeit, which was usually obscenely biological.

ford prefect usually played to lose.

ford stared at arthur, who began to think that perhaps he did want to

go to the horse and groom after all.

but what about my house . . . ? he asked plaintively.
ford looked across to mr. prosser, and suddenly a wicked thought struck

him.

he wants to knock your house down?
yes, he wants to build . . . and he cant because youre lying in front of the bulldozers?
yes, and . . . 
im sure we can come to some arrangement, said ford. excuse me!

he shouted.

mr. prosser (who was arguing with a spokesman for the bulldozer drivers
about whether or not arthur dent constituted a mental health hazard, and
how much they should get paid if he did) looked around. he was surprised
and slightly alarmed to nd that arthur had company.

yes? hello? he called. has mr. dent come to his senses yet?
can we for the moment, called ford, assume that he hasnt?
well? sighed mr. prosser.
and can we also assume, said ford, that hes going to be staying here

all day?
so?
so all your men are going to be standing around all day doing nothing?
could be, could be . . . 
well, if youre resigned to doing that anyway, you dont actually need

him to lie here all the time do you?

what?
you dont, said ford patiently, actually need him here.
mr. prosser thought about this.
well no, not as such . . . , he said, not exactly need . . . 
prosser was worried. he thought that one of them wasnt making a lot

of sense.

ford said, so if you would just like to take it as read that hes actually
here, then he and i could slip o down to the pub for half an hour. how does
that sound?

mr. prosser thought it sounded perfectly potty.
that sounds perfectly reasonable, he said in a reassuring tone of voice,

wondering who he was trying to reassure.

and if you want to pop o for a quick one yourself later on, said ford,

we can always cover up for you in return.

thank you very much, said mr. prosser who no longer knew how to
play this at all, thank you very much, yes, thats very kind . . .  he frowned,
then smiled, then tried to do both at once, failed, grasped hold of his fur hat
and rolled it tfully round the top of his head. he could only assume that
he had just won.

so, continued ford prefect, if you would just like to come over here

and lie down . . . 

what? said mr. prosser.ah, im sorry, said ford, perhaps i hadnt made myself fully clear.
somebodys got to lie in front of the bulldozers havent they? or there wont
be anything to stop them driving into mr. dents house will there?

what? said mr. prosser again.
its very simple, said ford, my client, mr. dent, says that he will stop
lying here in the mud on the sole condition that you come and take over from
him.

what are you talking about? said arthur, but ford nudged him with

his shoe to be quiet.

you want me, said mr. prosser, spelling out this new thought to him-

self, to come and lie there . . . 

yes.
in front of the bulldozer?
yes.
instead of mr. dent.
yes.
in the mud.
in, as you say it, the mud.
as soon as mr. prosser realized that he was substantially the loser after
all, it was as if a weight lifted itself o his shoulders: this was more like the
world as he knew it. he sighed.

in return for which you will take mr. dent with you down to the pub?
thats it, said ford. thats it exactly.
mr. prosser took a few nervous steps forward and stopped.
promise? he said.
promise, said ford. he turned to arthur.
come on, he said to him, get up and let the man lie down.
arthur stood up, feeling as if he was in a dream.
ford beckoned to prosser who sadly, awkwardly, sat down in the mud. he
felt that his whole life was some kind of dream and he sometimes wondered
whose it was and whether they were enjoying it. the mud folded itself round
his bottom and his arms and oozed into his shoes.

ford looked at him severely.
and no sneaky knocking down mr. dents house whilst hes away, al-

right? he said.

the mere thought, growled mr. prosser, hadnt even begun to spec-
ulate, he continued, settling himself back, about the merest possibility of
crossing my mind.

he saw the bulldozer drivers union representative approaching and let his
head sink back and closed his eyes. he was trying to marshal his arguments
for proving that he did not now constitute a mental health hazard himself.he was far from certain about this  his mind seemed to be full of noise,
horses, smoke, and the stench of blood. this always happened when he felt
miserable and put upon, and he had never been able to explain it to himself.
in a high dimension of which we know nothing the mighty khan bellowed
with rage, but mr. prosser only trembled slightly and whimpered. he began
to fell little pricks of water behind the eyelids. bureaucratic cock-ups, angry
men lying in the mud, indecipherable strangers handing out inexplicable
humiliations and an unidentied army of horsemen laughing at him in his
head  what a day.

what a day. ford prefect knew that it didnt matter a pair of dingos

kidneys whether arthurs house got knocked down or not now.

arthur remained very worried.
but can we trust him? he said.
myself id trust him to the end of the earth, said ford.
oh yes, said arthur, and how fars that?
about twelve minutes away, said ford, come on, i need a drink.

heres what the encyclopedia galactica has to say about alcohol. it says that
alcohol is a colourless volatile liquid formed by the fermentation of sugars and
also notes its intoxicating eect on certain carbon-based life forms.

the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy also mentions alcohol. it says that

the best drink in existence is the pan galactic gargle blaster.

it says that the eect of a pan galactic gargle blaster is like having your

brains smashed out by a slice of lemon wrapped round a large gold brick.

the guide also tells you on which planets the best pan galactic gar-
gle blasters are mixed, how much you can expect to pay for one and what
voluntary organizations exist to help you rehabilitate afterwards.

the guide even tells you how you can mix one yourself.
take the juice from one bottle of that ol janx spirit, it says.
pour into it one measure of water from the seas of santraginus v  oh

that santraginean sea water, it says. oh, those santraginean sh!

allow three cubes of arcturan mega-gin to melt into the mixture (it must

be properly iced or the benzine is lost).

allow four litres of fallian marsh gas to bubble through it, in memory of

all those happy hikers who have died of pleasure in the marshes of fallia.

over the back of a silver spoon oat a measure of qualactin hypermint
extract, redolent of all the heady odours of the dark qualactin zones, subtle
sweet and mystic.

drop in the tooth of an algolian suntiger. watch it dissolve, spreading

the res of the algolian suns deep into the heart of the drink.

sprinkle zamphuor.
add an olive.
drink . . . but . . . very carefully . . .
the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy sells rather better than the ency-

clopedia galactica.

six pints of bitter, said ford prefect to the barman of the horse and

groom. and quickly please, the worlds about to end.the barman of the horse and groom didnt deserve this sort of treatment,
he was a dignied old man. he pushed his glasses up his nose and blinked at
ford prefect. ford ignored him and stared out of the window, so the barman
looked instead at arthur who shrugged helplessly and said nothing.

so the barman said, oh yes sir? nice weather for it, and started pulling

pints.

he tried again. going to watch the match this afternoon then?
ford glanced round at him.
no, no point, he said, and looked back out of the window.
whats that, foregone conclusion then you reckon sir? said the barman.

arsenal without a chance?

no, no, said ford, its just that the worlds about to end.
oh yes, sir, so you said, said the barman, looking over his glasses this

time at arthur. lucky escape for arsenal if it did.

ford looked back at him, genuinely surprised.
no, not really, he said. he frowned.
the barman breathed in heavily. there you are sir, six pints, he said.
arthur smiled at him wanly and shrugged again. he turned and smiled
wanly at the rest of the pub just in case any of them had heard what was
going on.

none of them had, and none of them could understand what he was

smiling at them for.

a man sitting next to ford at the bar looked at the two men, looked at
the six pints, did a swift burst of mental arithmetic, arrived at an answer he
liked and grinned a stupid hopeful grin at them.

get o, said ford, theyre ours, giving him a look that would have

an algolian suntiger get on with what it was doing.

ford slapped a ve-pound note on the bar. he said, keep the change.
what, from a ver? thank you sir.
youve got ten minutes left to spend it.
the barman simply decided to walk away for a bit.
ford, said arthur, would you please tell me what the hell is going

on?

drink up, said ford, youve got three pints to get through.
three pints? said arthur. at lunchtime?
the man next to ford grinned and nodded happily. ford ignored him.

he said, time is an illusion. lunchtime doubly so.

very deep, said arthur, you should send that in to the readers digest.

theyve got a page for people like you.

drink up.
why three pints all of a sudden?muscle relaxant, youll need it.
muscle relaxant?
muscle relaxant.
arthur stared into his beer.
did i do anything wrong today, he said, or has the world always been

like this and ive been too wrapped up in myself to notice?

all right, said ford, ill try to explain. how long have we known each

other?

how long? arthur thought. er, about ve years, maybe six, he said.

most of it seemed to make some sense at the time.

all right, said ford. how would you react if i said that im not from
guildford after all, but from a small planet somewhere in the vicinity of
betelgeuse?

arthur shrugged in a so-so sort of way.
i dont know, he said, taking a pull of beer. why  do you think its

the sort of thing youre likely to say?

ford gave up. it really wasnt worth bothering at the moment, what with

the world being about to end. he just said: drink up.

he added, perfectly factually: the worlds about to end.
arthur gave the rest of the pub another wan smile. the rest of the pub
frowned at him. a man waved at him to stop smiling at them and mind his
own business.

this must be thursday, said arthur musing to himself, sinking low over

his beer, i never could get the hang of thursdays.

on this particular thursday, something was moving quietly through the iono-
sphere many miles above the surface of the planet; several somethings in fact,
several dozen huge yellow chunky slablike somethings, huge as oce build-
ings, silent as birds. they soared with ease, basking in electromagnetic rays
from the star sol, biding their time, grouping, preparing.

the planet beneath them was almost perfectly oblivious of their pres-
ence, which was just how they wanted it for the moment. the huge yellow
somethings went unnoticed at goonhilly, they passed over cape canaveral
without a blip, woomera and jodrell bank looked straight through them 
which was a pity because it was exactly the sort of thing theyd been looking
for all these years.

the only place they registered at all was on a small black device called a
sub-etha sens-o-matic which winked away quietly to itself. it nestled in the
darkness inside a leather satchel which ford prefect wore habitually round
his neck. the contents of ford prefects satchel were quite interesting in fact
and would have made any earth physicists eyes pop out of his head, which
is why he always concealed them by keeping a couple of dog-eared scripts
for plays he pretended he was auditioning for stued in the top. besides
the sub-etha sens-o-matic and the scripts he had an electronic thumb 
a short squat black rod, smooth and matt with a couple of at switches
and dials at one end; he also had a device which looked rather like a largish
electronic calculator. this had about a hundred tiny at press buttons and a
screen about four inches square on which any one of a million pages could
be summoned at a moments notice. it looked insanely complicated, and this
was one of the reasons why the snug plastic cover it tted into had the words
dont panic printed on it in large friendly letters. the other reason was
that this device was in fact that most remarkable of all books ever to come
out of the great publishing corporations of ursa minor  the hitchhikers
guide to the galaxy. the reason why it was published in the form of a micro
sub meson electronic component is that if it were printed in normal bookform, an interstellar hitchhiker would require several inconveniently large
buildings to carry it around in.

beneath that in ford prefects satchel were a few biros, a notepad, and

a largish bath towel from marks and spencer.

the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy has a few things to say on the

subject of towels.

a towel, it says, is about the most massively useful thing an interstellar
hitchhiker can have. partly it has great practical value  you can wrap it
around you for warmth as you bound across the cold moons of jaglan beta;
you can lie on it on the brilliant marble-sanded beaches of santraginus v, in-
haling the heady sea vapours; you can sleep under it beneath the stars which
shine so redly on the desert world of kakrafoon; use it to sail a mini raft
down the slow heavy river moth; wet it for use in hand-tohand-combat; wrap
it round your head to ward o noxious fumes or to avoid the gaze of the
ravenous bugblatter beast of traal (a mindboggingly stupid animal, it as-
sumes that if you cant see it, it cant see you  daft as a bush, but very
ravenous); you can wave your towel in emergencies as a distress signal, and
of course dry yourself o with it if it still seems to be clean enough.

more importantly, a towel has immense psychological value. for some
reason, if a strag (strag: non-hitchhiker) discovers that a hitchhiker has his
towel with him, he will automatically assume that he is also in possession of
a toothbrush, face annel, soap, tin of biscuits, ask, compass, map, ball of
string, gnat spray, wet weather gear, space suit etc., etc. furthermore, the
strag will then happily lend the hitchhiker any of these or a dozen other items
that the hitchhiker might accidentally have lost. what the strag will think
is that any man who can hitch the length and breadth of the galaxy, rough it,
slum it, struggle against terrible odds, win through, and still knows where his
towel is is clearly a man to be reckoned with.

hence a phrase which has passed into hitchhiking slang, as in hey, you
sass that hoopy ford prefect? theres a frood who really knows where his
towel is. (sass: know, be aware of, meet, have sex with; hoopy: really to-
gether guy; frood: really amazingly together guy.)

nestling quietly on top of the towel in ford prefects satchel, the sub-
etha sens-o-matic began to wink more quickly. miles above the surface of
the planet the huge yellow somethings began to fan out. at jodrell bank,
someone decided it was time for a nice relaxing cup of tea.

you got a towel with you? said ford prefect suddenly to arthur.
arthur, struggling through his third pint, looked round at him.why? what, no . . . should i have? he had given up being surprised,

there didnt seem to be any point any longer.

ford clicked his tongue in irritation.
drink up, he urged.
at that moment the dull sound of a rumbling crash from outside ltered
through the low murmur of the pub, through the sound of the jukebox,
through the sound of the man next to ford hiccupping over the whisky ford
had eventually bought him.

arthur choked on his beer, leapt to his feet.
whats that? he yelped.
dont worry, said ford, they havent started yet.
thank god for that, said arthur and relaxed.
its probably just your house being knocked down, said ford, drowning

his last pint.

what? shouted arthur. suddenly fords spell was broken. arthur

looked wildly around him and ran to the window.

my god they are! theyre knocking my house down. what the hell am

i doing in the pub, ford?

it hardly makes any dierence at this stage, said ford, let them have

their fun.

fun? yelped arthur. fun! he quickly checked out of the window

again that they were talking about the same thing.

damn their fun! he hooted and ran out of the pub furiously waving a
nearly empty beer glass. he made no friends at all in the pub that lunchtime.
stop, you vandals! you home wreckers! bawled arthur. you half

crazed visigoths, stop will you!

ford would have to go after him. turning quickly to the barman he asked

for four packets of peanuts.

there you are sir, said the barman, slapping the packets on the bar,

twenty-eight pence if youd be so kind.

ford was very kind  he gave the barman another ve-pound note and
told him to keep the change. the barman looked at it and then looked at
ford. he suddenly shivered: he experienced a momentary sensation that he
didnt understand because no one on earth had ever experienced it before. in
moments of great stress, every life form that exists gives out a tiny sublimal
signal. this signal simply communicates an exact and almost pathetic sense
of how far that being is from the place of his birth. on earth it is never
possible to be further than sixteen thousand miles from your birthplace,
which really isnt very far, so such signals are too minute to be noticed. ford
prefect was at this moment under great stress, and he was born 600 light
years away in the near vicinity of betelgeuse.the barman reeled for a moment, hit by a shocking, incomprehensible
sense of distance. he didnt know what it meant, but he looked at ford
prefect with a new sense of respect, almost awe.

are you serious, sir? he said in a small whisper which had the eect of

silencing the pub. you think the worlds going to end?

yes, said ford.
but, this afternoon?
ford had recovered himself. he was at his ippest.
yes, he said gaily, in less than two minutes i would estimate.
the barman couldnt believe the conversation he was having, but he

couldnt believe the sensation he had just had either.

isnt there anything we can do about it then? he said.
no, nothing, said ford, stung the peanuts into his pockets.
someone in the hushed bar suddenly laughed raucously at how stupid

everyone had become.

the man sitting next to ford was a bit sozzled by now. his eyes waved

their way up to ford.

i thought, he said, that if the world was going to end we were meant

to lie down or put a paper bag over our head or something.

if you like, yes, said ford.
thats what they told us in the army, said the man, and his eyes began

the long trek back down to his whisky.

will that help? asked the barman.
no, said ford and gave him a friendly smile. excuse me, he said,

ive got to go. with a wave, he left.

the pub was silent for a moment longer, and then, embarrassingly enough,
the man with the raucous laugh did it again. the girl he had dragged along
to the pub with him had grown to loathe him dearly over the last hour or
so, and it would probably have been a great satisfaction to her to know that
in a minute and a half or so he would suddenly evaporate into a whi of
hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide. however, when the moment came
she would be too busy evaporating herself to notice it.

the barman cleared his throat. he heard himself say: last orders,

please.

the huge yellow machines began to sink downward and to move faster.
ford knew they were there. this wasnt the way he had wanted it.

running up the lane, arthur had nearly reached his house. he didnt
notice how cold it had suddenly become, he didnt notice the wind, he didntnotice the sudden irrational squall of rain. he didnt notice anything but the
caterpillar bulldozers crawling over the rubble that had been his home.

you barbarians! he yelled. ill sue the council for every penny its got!
ill have you hung, drawn and quartered! and whipped! and boiled . . . until
. . . until . . . until youve had enough.

ford was running after him very fast. very very fast.
and then ill do it again! yelled arthur. and when ive nished i will

take all the little bits, and i will jump on them!

arthur didnt notice that the men were running from the bulldozers; he
didnt notice that mr. prosser was staring hectically into the sky. what
mr. prosser had noticed was that huge yellow somethings were screaming
through the clouds. impossibly huge yellow somethings.

and i will carry on jumping on them, yelled arthur, still running, until
i get blisters, or i can think of anything even more unpleasant to do, and
then . . . 

arthur tripped, and fell headlong, rolled and landed at on his back. at

last he noticed that something was going on. his nger shot upwards.

what the hells that? he shrieked.
whatever it was raced across the sky in monstrous yellowness, tore the
sky apart with mind-buggering noise and leapt o into the distance leaving
the gaping air to shut behind it with a bang that drove your ears six feet
into your skull.

another one followed and did the same thing only louder.
its dicult to say exactly what the people on the surface of the planet
were doing now, because they didnt really know what they were doing them-
selves. none of it made a lot of sense running into houses, running out of
houses, howling noiselessly at the noise. all around the world city streets
exploded with people, cars slewed into each other as the noise fell on them
and then rolled o like a tidal wave over hills and valleys, deserts and oceans,
seeming to atten everything it hit.

only one man stood and watched the sky, stood with terrible sadness in
his eyes and rubber bungs in his ears. he knew exactly what was happening
and had known ever since his sub-etha sens-omatic had started winking in
the dead of night beside his pillar and woken him with a start. it was what
he had waited for all these years, but when he had deciphered the signal
pattern sitting alone in his small dark room a coldness had gripped him and
squeezed his heart. of all the races in all of the galaxy who could have come
and said a big hello to planet earth, he thought, didnt it just have to be the
vogons.

still he knew what he had to do. as the vogon craft screamed through the
air high above him he opened his satchel. he threw away a copy of joseph andthe amazing technicolor dreamcoat, he threw away a copy of godspell : he
wouldnt need them where he was going. everything was ready, everything
was prepared.

he knew where his towel was.

a sudden silence hit the earth. if anything it was worse than the noise.

for a while nothing happened.

the great ships hung motionless in the air, over every nation on earth.
motionless they hung, huge, heavy, steady in the sky, a blasphemy against
nature. many people went straight into shock as their minds tried to encom-
pass what they were looking at. the ships hung in the sky in much the same
way that bricks dont.

and still nothing happened.
then there was a slight whisper, a sudden spacious whisper of open am-
bient sound. every hi  set in the world, every radio, every television, every
cassette recorder, every woofer, every tweeter, every mid-range driver in the
world quietly turned itself on.

every tin can, every dust bin, every window, every car, every wine glass,
every sheet of rusty metal became activated as an acoustically perfect sound-
ing board.

before the earth passed away it was going to be treated to the very
ultimate in sound reproduction, the greatest public address system ever built.
but there was no concert, no music, no fanfare, just a simple message.

people of earth, your attention please, a voice said, and it was won-
derful. wonderful perfect quadrophonic sound with distortion levels so low
as to make a brave man weep.

this is prostetnic vogon jeltz of the galactic hyperspace planning coun-
cil, the voice continued. as you will no doubt be aware, the plans for de-
velopment of the outlying regions of the galaxy require the building of a hy-
perspatial express route through your star system, and regrettably your planet
is one of those scheduled for demolition. the process will take slightly less
that two of your earth minutes. thank you.

the pa died away.
uncomprehending terror settled on the watching people of earth. the
terror moved slowly through the gathered crowds as if they were iron llings
on a sheet of board and a magnet was moving beneath them. panic sprouted
again, desperate eeing panic, but there was nowhere to ee to.

observing this, the vogons turned on their pa again. it said:
theres no point in acting all surprised about it. all the planning charts
and demolition orders have been on display in your local planning departmenton alpha centauri for fty of your earth years, so youve had plenty of time
to lodge any formal complaint and its far too late to start making a fuss
about it now.

the pa fell silent again and its echo drifted o across the land. the huge
ships turned slowly in the sky with easy power. on the underside of each a
hatchway opened, an empty black space.

by this time somebody somewhere must have manned a radio transmitter,
located a wavelength and broadcasted a message back to the vogon ships,
to plead on behalf of the planet. nobody ever heard what they said, they
only heard the reply. the pa slammed back into life again. the voice was
annoyed. it said:

what do you mean youve never been to alpha centauri? for heavens
sake mankind, its only four light years away you know. im sorry, but if you
cant be bothered to take an interest in local aairs thats your own lookout.

energize the demolition beams.
light poured out into the hatchways.
i dont know, said the voice on the pa, apathetic bloody planet, ive

no sympathy at all. it cut o.

there was a terrible ghastly silence.
there was a terrible ghastly noise.
there was a terrible ghastly silence.
the vogon constructor eet coasted away into the inky starry void.

far away on the opposite spiral arm of the galaxy, ve hundred thousand
light years from the star sol, zaphod beeblebrox, president of the imperial
galactic government, sped across the seas of damogran, his ion drive delta
boat winking and ashing in the damogran sun.

damogran the hot; damogran the remote; damogran the almost totally

unheard of.

damogran, secret home of the heart of gold.
the boat sped on across the water.

it would be some time before it
reached its destination because damogran is such an inconveniently arranged
planet. it consists of nothing but middling to large desert islands separated
by very pretty but annoyingly wide stretches of ocean.

the boat sped on.
because of this topological awkwardness damogran has always remained
a deserted planet. this is why the imperial galactic government chose
damogran for the heart of gold project, because it was so deserted and the
heart of gold was so secret.

the boat zipped and skipped across the sea, the sea that lay between the
main islands of the only archipelago of any useful size on the whole planet.
zaphod beeblebrox was on his way from the tiny spaceport on easter island
(the name was an entirely meaningless coincidence  in galacticspeke, easter
means small at and light brown) to the heart of gold island, which by
another meaningless coincidence was called france.

one of the side eects of work on the heart of gold was a whole string

of pretty meaningless coincidences.

but it was not in any way a coincidence that today, the day of culmi-
nation of the project, the great day of unveiling, the day that the heart of
gold was nally to be introduced to a marvelling galaxy, was also a great
day of culmination for zaphod beeblebrox. it was for the sake of this day
that he had rst decided to run for the presidency, a decision which had
sent waves of astonishment throughout the imperial galaxy  zaphod bee-blebrox? president? not the zaphod beeblebrox? not the president? many
had seen it as a clinching proof that the whole of known creation had nally
gone bananas.

zaphod grinned and gave the boat an extra kick of speed.
zaphod beeblebrox, adventurer, ex-hippy, good timer, (crook? quite
possibly), manic self-publicist, terribly bad at personal relationships, often
thought to be completely out to lunch.

president?
no one had gone bananas, not in that way at least.
only six people in the entire galaxy understood the principle on which
the galaxy was governed, and they knew that once zaphod beeblebrox had
announced his intention to run as president it was more or less a fait accompli:
he was the ideal presidency fodder.1

what they completely failed to understand was why zaphod was doing

it.

he banked sharply, shooting a wild wall of water at the sun.
today was the day; today was the day when they would realize what
zaphod had been up to. today was what zaphod beeblebroxs presidency
was all about. today was also his two hundredth birthday, but that was just
another meaningless coincidence.

as he skipped his boat across the seas of damogran he smiled quietly to
himself about what a wonderful exciting day it was going to be. he relaxed
and spread his two arms lazily across the seat back. he steered with an

1president: full title president of the imperial galactic government.
the term imperial is kept though it is now an anachronism. the hereditary emperor
is nearly dead and has been so for many centuries. in the last moments of his dying coma
he was locked in a statis eld which keeps him in a state of perpetual unchangingness. all
his heirs are now long dead, and this means that without any drastic political upheaval,
power has simply and eectively moved a rung or two down the ladder, and is now seen
to be vested in a body which used to act simply as advisers to the emperor  an elected
governmental assembly headed by a president elected by that assembly. in fact it vests
in no such place.

the president in particular is very much a gurehead  he wields no real power what-
soever. he is apparently chosen by the government, but the qualities he is required to
display are not those of leadership but those of nely judged outrage. for this reason the
president is always a controversial choice, always an infuriating but fascinating charac-
ter. his job is not to wield power but to draw attention away from it. on those criteria
zaphod beeblebrox is one of the most successful presidents the galaxy has ever had 
he has already spent two of his ten presidential years in prison for fraud. very very few
people realize that the president and the government have virtually no power at all, and
of these very few people only six know whence ultimate political power is wielded. most
of the others secretly believe that the ultimate decision-making process is handled by a
computer. they couldnt be more wrong.extra arm hed recently tted just beneath his right one to help improve his
ski-boxing.

hey, he cooed to himself, youre a real cool boy you. but his nerves

sang a song shriller than a dog whistle.

the island of france was about twenty miles long, ve miles across the
middle, sandy and crescent shaped. in fact it seemed to exist not so much as
an island in its own right as simply a means of dening the sweep and curve
of a huge bay. this impression was heightened by the fact that the inner
coastline of the crescent consisted almost entirely of steep clis. from the
top of the cli the land sloped slowly down ve miles to the opposite shore.

on top of the clis stood a reception committee.
it consisted in large part of the engineers and researchers who had built
the heart of gold  mostly humanoid, but here and there were a few reptiloid
atomineers, two or three green slyph-like maximegalacticans, an octopoid
physucturalist or two and a hooloovoo (a hooloovoo is a super-intelligent
shade of the color blue). all except the hooloovoo were resplendent in their
multicolored ceremonial lab coats; the hooloovoo had been temporarily re-
fracted into a free standing prism for the occasion.

there was a mood of immense excitement thrilling through all of them.
together and between them they had gone to and beyond the furthest limits
of physical laws, restructured the fundamental fabric of matter, strained,
twisted and broken the laws of possibility and impossibility, but still the
greatest excitement of all seemed to be to meet a man with an orange sash
round his neck.
(an orange sash was what the president of the galaxy
traditionally wore.) it might not even have made much dierence to them if
theyd known exactly how much power the president of the galaxy actually
wielded: none at all. only six people in the galaxy knew that the job of
the galactic president was not to wield power but to attract attention away
from it.

zaphod beeblebrox was amazingly good at his job.
the crowd gasped, dazzled by sun and seemanship, as the presidential
speedboat zipped round the headland into the bay. it ashed and shone as
it came skating over the sea in wide skidding turns.

in fact it didnt need to touch the water at all, because it was supported
on a hazy cushion of ionized atoms  but just for eect it was tted with
thin nblades which could be lowered into the water. they slashed sheets
of water hissing into the air, carved deep gashes into the sea which swayed
crazily and sank back foaming into the boats wake as it careered across the
bay.

zaphod loved eect: it was what he was best at.
he twisted the wheel sharply, the boat slewed round in a wild scythingskid beneath the cli face and dropped to rest lightly on the rocking waves.
within seconds he ran out onto the deck and waved and grinned at over
three billion people. the three billion people werent actually there, but they
watched his every gesture through the eyes of a small robot tri-d camera
which hovered obsequiously in the air nearby. the antics of the president
always made amazingly popular tri-d; thats what they were for.

he grinned again. three billion and six people didnt know it, but today

would be a bigger antic than anyone had bargained for.

the robot camera homed in for a close up on the more popular of his two
heads and he waved again. he was roughly humanoid in appearance except
for the extra head and third arm. his fair tousled hair stuck out in random
directions, his blue eyes glinted with something completely unidentiable,
and his chins were almost always unshaven.

a twenty-foot-high transparent globe oated next to his boat, rolling and
bobbing, glistening in the brilliant sun. inside it oated a wide semi-circular
sofa upholstered in glorious red leather: the more the globe bobbed and
rolled, the more the sofa stayed perfectly still, steady as an upholstered rock.
again, all done for eect as much as anything.

zaphod stepped through the wall of the globe and relaxed on the sofa.
he spread his two arms lazily along the back and with the third brushed
some dust o his knee. his heads looked about, smiling; he put his feet up.
at any moment, he thought, he might scream.

water boiled up beneath the bubble, it seethed and spouted. the bubble
surged into the air, bobbing and rolling on the water spout. up, up it
climbed, throwing stilts of light at the cli. up it surged on the jet, the
water falling from beneath it, crashing back into the sea hundreds of feet
below.

zaphod smiled, picturing himself.
a thoroughly ridiculous form of transport, but a thoroughly beautiful

one.

at the top of the cli the globe wavered for a moment, tipped on to a
railed ramp, rolled down it to a small concave platform and riddled to a halt.
to tremendous applause zaphod beeblebrox stepped out of the bubble,

his orange sash blazing in the light.

the president of the galaxy had arrived.
he waited for the applause to die down, then raised his hands in greeting.
hi, he said.
a government spider sidled up to him and attempted to press a copy of his
prepared speech into his hands. pages three to seven of the original version
were at the moment oating soggily on the damogran sea some ve miles out
from the bay. pages one and two had been salvaged by a damogran frondcrested eagle and had already become incorporated into an extraordinary
new form of nest which the eagle had invented. it was constructed largely
of papier mache and it was virtually impossible for a newly hatched baby
eagle to break out of it. the damogran frond crested eagle had heard of
the notion of survival of the species but wanted no truck with it.

zaphod beeblebrox would not be needing his set speech and he gently

deected the one being oered him by the spider.

hi, he said again.
everyone beamed at him, or, at least, nearly everyone. he singled out
trillian from the crowd. trillian was a gird that zaphod had picked up
recently whilst visiting a planet, just for fun, incognito. she was slim, darkish,
humanoid, with long waves of black hair, a full mouth, an odd little nob of
a nose and ridiculously brown eyes. with her red head scarf knotted in that
particular way and her long owing silky brown dress she looked vaguely
arabic. not that anyone there had ever heard of an arab of course. the
arabs had very recently ceased to exist, and even when they had existed
they were ve hundred thousand light years from damogran. trillian wasnt
anybody in particular, or so zaphod claimed. she just went around with him
rather a lot and told him what she thought of him.

hi honey, he said to her.
she ashed him a quick tight smile and looked away. then she looked
back for a moment and smiled more warmly  but by this time he was looking
at something else.

hi, he said to a small knot of creatures from the press who were standing
nearby wishing that he would stop saying hi and get on with the quotes.
he grinned at them particularly because he knew that in a few moments he
would be giving them one hell of a quote.

the next thing he said though was not a lot of use to them. one of the
ocials of the party had irritably decided that the president was clearly not
in a mood to read the deliciously turned speech that had been written for
him, and had ipped the switch on the remote control device in his pocket.
away in front of them a huge white dome that bulged against the sky cracked
down in the middle, split, and slowly folded itself down into the ground.
everyone gasped although they had known perfectly well it was going to do
that because they had built it that way.

beneath it lay uncovered a huge starship, one hundred and fty metres
long, shaped like a sleek running shoe, perfectly white and mindboggingly
beautiful. at the heart of it, unseen, lay a small gold box which carried
within it the most brain-wretching device ever conceived, a device which
made this starship unique in the history of the galaxy, a device after which
the ship had been named  the heart of gold.wow, said zaphod beeblebrox to the heart of gold. there wasnt

much else he could say.

he said it again because he knew it would annoy the press. wow.
the crowd turned their faces back towards him expectantly. he winked
at trillian who raised her eyebrows and widened her eyes at him. she knew
what he was about to say and thought him a terrible showo.

that is really amazing, he said. that really is truly amazing. that is

so amazingly amazing i think id like to steal it.

a marvellous presidential quote, absolutely true to form. the crowd
laughed appreciatively, the newsmen gleefully punched buttons on their sub-
etha news-matics and the president grinned.

as he grinned his heart screamed unbearably and he ngered the small

paralyso-matic bomb that nestled quietly in his pocket.

finally he could bear it no more. he lifted his heads up to the sky, let
out a wild whoop in major thirds, threw the bomb to the ground and ran
forward through the sea of suddenly frozen smiles.

prostetnic vogon jeltz was not a pleasant sight, even for other vogons. his
highly domed nose rose high above a small piggy forehead. his dark green
rubbery skin was thick enough for him to play the game of vogon civil
service politics, and play it well, and waterproof enough for him to survive
indenitely at sea depths of up to a thousand feet with no ill eects.

not that he ever went swimming of course. his busy schedule would not
allow it. he was the way he was because billions of years ago when the
vogons had rst crawled out of the sluggish primeval seas of vogsphere, and
had lain panting and heaving on the planets virgin shores. . . when the rst
rays of the bright young vogsol sun had shone across them that morning, it
was as if the forces of evolution ad simply given up on them there and then,
had turned aside in disgust and written them o as an ugly and unfortunate
mistake. they never evolved again; they should never have survived.

the fact that they did is some kind of tribute to the thickwilled slug-
brained stubbornness of these creatures. evolution? they said to themselves,
who needs it?, and what nature refused to do for them they simply did
without until such time as they were able to rectify the grosser anatomical
inconveniences with surgery.

meanwhile, the natural forces on the planet vogsphere had been working
overtime to make up for their earlier blunder. they brought forth scintillating
jewelled scuttling crabs, which the vogons ate, smashing their shells with iron
mallets; tall aspiring trees with breathtaking slenderness and colour which
the vogons cut down and burned the crab meat with; elegant gazellelike
creatures with silken coats and dewy eyes which the vogons would catch
and sit on. they were no use as transport because their backs would snap
instantly, but the vogons sat on them anyway.

thus the planet vogsphere whiled away the unhappy millennia until the
vogons suddenly discovered the principles of interstellar travel. within a few
short vog years every last vogon had migrated to the megabrantis cluster, the
political hub of the galaxy and now formed the immensely powerful backboneof the galactic civil service. they have attempted to acquire learning, they
have attempted to acquire style and social grace, but in most respects the
modern vogon is little dierent from his primitive forebears. every year they
import twenty-seven thousand scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs from their
native planet and while away a happy drunken night smashing them to bits
with iron mallets.

prostetnic vogon jeltz was a fairly typical vogon in that he was thor-

oughly vile. also, he did not like hitchhikers.

* * *

somewhere in a small dark cabin buried deep in the intestines of prostet-
nic vogon jeltzs agship, a small match ared nervously. the owner of the
match was not a vogon, but he knew all about them and was right to be
nervous. his name was ford prefect.1

he looked about the cabin but could see very little; strange monstrous
shadows loomed and leaped with the tiny ickering ame, but all was quiet.
he breathed a silent thank you to the dentrassis. the dentrassis are an
unruly tribe of gourmands, a wild but pleasant bunch whom the vogons had
recently taken to employing as catering sta on their long haul eets, on the
strict understanding that they keep themselves very much to themselves.

this suited the dentrassis ne, because they loved vogon money, which
is one of the hardest currencies in space, but loathed the vogons themselves.
the only sort of vogon a dentrassi liked to see was an annoyed vogon.

it was because of this tiny piece of information that ford prefect was not

now a whi of hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide.

he heard a slight groan. by the light of the match he saw a heavy shape
moving slightly on the oor. quickly he shook the match out, reached in his

1ford prefects original name is only pronuncible in an obscure betelgeusian dialect,
now virtually extinct since the great collapsing hrung disaster of gal./sid./year 03758
which wiped out all the old praxibetel communities on betelgeuse seven. fords father
was the only man on the entire planet to survive the great collapsing hrung disaster, by
an extraordinary coincidence that he was never able satisfactorily to explain. the whole
episode is shrouded in deep mystery: in fact no one ever knew what a hrung was nor why
it had chosen to collapse on betelgeuse seven particularly. fords father, magnanimously
waving aside the clouds of suspicion that had inevitably settled around him, came to live
on betelgeuse five where he both fathered and uncled ford; in memory of his now dead
race he christened him in the ancient praxibetel tongue.

because ford never learned to say his original name, his father eventually died of shame,
which is still a terminal disease in some parts of the galaxy. the other kids at school
nicknamed him ix, which in the language of betelgeuse five translates as boy who is not
able satisfactorily to explain what a hrung is, nor why it should choose to collapse on
betelgeuse seven.pocket, found what he was looking for and took it out. he crouched on the
oor. the shape moved again.

ford prefect said: i bought some peanuts.
arthur dent moved, and groaned again, muttering incoherently.
here, have some, urged ford, shaking the packet again, if youve never
been through a matter transference beam before youve probably lost some
salt and protein. the beer you had should have cushioned your system a
bit.

whhhrrrr. . .  said arthur dent. he opened his eyes. its dark, he

said.

yes, said ford prefect, its dark.
no light, said arthur dent. dark, no light.
one of the things ford prefect had always found hardest to understand
about human beings was their habit of continually stating and repeating the
obvious, as in its a nice day, or youre very tall, or oh dear you seem to
have fallen down a thirty-foot well, are you alright? at rst ford had formed
a theory to account for this strange behaviour. if human beings dont keep
exercising their lips, he thought, their mouths probably seize up. after a few
months consideration and observation he abandoned this theory in favour
of a new one. if they dont keep on exercising their lips, he thought, their
brains start working. after a while he abandoned this one as well as being
obstructively cynical and decided he quite liked human beings after all, but
he always remained desperately worried about the terrible number of things
they didnt know about.

yes, he agreed with arthur, no light. he helped arthur to some

peanuts. how do you feel? he asked.

like a military academy, said arthur, bits of me keep on passing out.
ford stared at him blankly in the darkness.
if i asked you where the hell we were, said arthur weakly, would i

regret it?

ford stood up. were safe, he said.
oh good, said arthur.
were in a small galley cabin, said ford, in one of the spaceships of

the vogon constructor fleet.

ah, said arthur, this is obviously some strange usage of the word safe

that i wasnt previously aware of.

ford struck another match to help him search for a light switch. mon-
strous shadows leaped and loomed again. arthur struggled to his feet and
hugged himself apprehensively. hideous alien shapes seemed to throng about
him, the air was thick with musty smells which sidled into his lungs without
identifying themselves, and a low irritating hum kept his brain from focusing.how did we get here? he asked, shivering slightly.
we hitched a lift, said ford.
excuse me? said arthur. are you trying to tell me that we just stuck
out our thumbs and some green bug-eyed monster stuck his head out and said,
hi fellas, hop right in. i can take you as far as the basingstoke roundabout?
well, said ford, the thumbs an electronic sub-etha signalling device,
the roundabouts at barnards star six light years away, but otherwise, thats
more or less right.

and the bug-eyed monster?
is green, yes.
fine, said arthur, when can i get home?
you cant, said ford prefect, and found the light switch.
shade your eyes . . .  he said, and turned it on.
even ford was surprised.
good grief, said arthur, is this really the interior of a ying saucer?

prostetnic vogon jeltz heaved his unpleasant green body round the con-
trol bridge. he always felt vaguely irritable after demolishing populated
planets. he wished that someone would come and tell him that it was all
wrong so that he could shout at them and feel better. he opped as heavily
as he could on to his control seat in the hope that it would break and give
him something to be genuinely angry about, but it only gave a complaining
sort of creak.

go away! he shouted at a young vogon guard who entered the bridge
at that moment. the guard vanished immediately, feeling rather relieved.
he was glad it wouldnt now be him who delivered the report theyd just
received. the report was an ocial release which said that a wonderful new
form of spaceship drive was at this moment being unveiled at a government
research base on damogran which would henceforth make all hyperspatial
express routes unnecessary.

another door slid open, but this time the vogon captain didnt shout be-
cause it was the door from the galley quarters where the dentrassis prepared
his meals. a meal would be most welcome.

a huge furry creature bounded through the door with his lunch tray. it

was grinning like a maniac.

prostetnic vogon jeltz was delighted. he knew that when a dentrassi
looked that pleased with itself there was something going on somewhere on
the ship that he could get very angry indeed about.

ford and arthur stared about them.
well, what do you think? said ford.its a bit squalid, isnt it?
ford frowned at the grubby mattress, unwashed cups and unidentiable

bits of smelly alien underwear that lay around the cramped cabin.

well, this is a working ship, you see, said ford. these are the dentrassi

sleeping quarters.

i thought you said they were called vogons or something.
yes, said ford, the vogons run the ship, the dentrassis are the cooks,

they let us on board.

im confused, said arthur.
here, have a look at this, said ford. he sat down on one of the mat-
tresses and rummaged about in his satchel. arthur prodded the mattress
nervously and then sat on it himself: in fact he had very little to be nervous
about, because all mattresses grown in the swamps of squornshellous zeta
are very thoroughly killed and dried before being put to service. very few
have ever come to life again.

ford handed the book to arthur.
what is it? asked arthur.
the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy. its a sort of electronic book. it

tells you everything you need to know about anything. thats its job.

arthur turned it over nervously in his hands.
i like the cover, he said. dont panic. its the rst helpful or intelligible

thing anybodys said to me all day.

ill show you how it works, said ford. he snatched it from arthur who
was still holding it as if it was a two-week-dead lark and pulled it out of its
cover.

you press this button here you see and the screen lights up giving you

the index.

a screen, about three inches by four, lit up and characters began to icker

across the surface.

you want to know about vogons, so i enter that name so. his ngers

tapped some more keys. and there we are.

the words vogon constructor fleets ared in green across the screen.
ford pressed a large red button at the bottom of the screen and words began
to undulate across it. at the same time, the book began to speak the entry
as well in a still quiet measured voice. this is what the book said.

vogon constructor fleets. here is what to do if you want to get a
lift from a vogon: forget it. they are one of the most unpleasant races in
the galaxy  not actually evil, but bad tempered, bureaucratic, ocious and
callous. they wouldnt even lift a nger to save their own grandmothers from
the ravenous bugblatter beast of traal without orders signed in triplicate,sent in, sent back, queried, lost, found, subjected to public inquiry, lost again,
and nally buried in soft peat and recycled as relighters.

the best way to get a drink out of a vogon is to stick your nger down
his throat, and the best way to irritate him is to feed his grandmother to the
ravenous bugblatter beast of traal.

on no account allow a vogon to read poetry at you.
arthur blinked at it.
what a strange book. how did we get a lift then?
thats the point, its out of date now, said ford, sliding the book back
into its cover. im doing the eld research for the new revised edition,
and one of the things ill have to include is a bit about how the vogons now
employ dentrassi cooks which gives us a rather useful little loophole.

a pained expression crossed arthurs face. but who are the dentrassi?

he said.

great guys, said ford. theyre the best cooks and the best drink
mixers and they dont give a wet slap about anything else. and theyll
always help hitchhikers aboard, partly because they like the company, but
mostly because it annoys the vogons. which is exactly the sort of thing you
need to know if youre an impoverished hitchhiker trying to see the marvels
of the universe for less than thirty altairan dollars a day. and thats my
job. fun, isnt it?

arthur looked lost.
its amazing, he said and frowned at one of the other mattresses.
unfortunately i got stuck on the earth for rather longer than i in-

tended, said ford. i came for a week and got stuck for fteen years.

but how did you get there in the rst place then?
easy, i got a lift with a teaser.
a teaser?
yeah.
er, what is . . . 
a teaser? teasers are usually rich kids with nothing to do. they cruise
around looking for planets which havent made interstellar contact yet and
buzz them.

buzz them? arthur began to feel that ford was enjoying making life

dicult for him.

yeah, said ford, they buzz them. they nd some isolated spot with
very few people around, then land right by some poor soul whom no ones
ever going to believe and then strut up and down in front of him wearing
silly antennae on their heads and making beep beep noises. rather childish
really. ford leant back on the mattress with his hands behind his head and
looked infuriatingly pleased with himself.ford, insisted arthur, i dont know if this sounds like a silly question,

but what am i doing here?

well you know that, said ford. i rescued you from the earth. and

whats happened to the earth?
ah. its been demolished.
has it, said arthur levelly.
yes. it just boiled away into space.
look, said arthur, im a bit upset about that.
ford frowned to himself and seemed to roll the thought around his mind.
yes, i can understand that, he said at last.
understand that! shouted arthur. understand that!
ford sprang up.
keep looking at the book! he hissed urgently.
what?
dont panic.
im not panicking!
yes you are.
all right so im panicking, what else is there to do?
you just come along with me and have a good time. the galaxys a fun

place. youll need to have this sh in your ear.

i beg your pardon? asked arthur, rather politely he thought.
ford was holding up a small glass jar which quite clearly had a small
yellow sh wriggling around in it. arthur blinked at him. he wished there
was something simple and recognizable he could grasp hold of. he would
have felt safe if alongside the dentrassi underwear, the piles of squornshellous
mattresses and the man from betelgeuse holding up a small yellow sh and
oering to put it in his ear he had been able to see just a small packet of
corn akes. he couldnt, and he didnt feel safe.

suddenly a violent noise leapt at them from no source that he could
identify. he gasped in terror at what sounded like a man trying to gargle
whilst ghting o a pack of wolves.

shush! said ford. listen, it might be important.
im . . . important?
its the vogon captain making an announcement on the tannoy.
you mean thats how the vogons talk?
listen!
but i cant speak vogon!
you dont need to. just put that sh in your ear.
ford, with a lightning movement, clapped his hand to arthurs ear, and
he had the sudden sickening sensation of the sh slithering deep into his aural
tract. gasping with horror he scrabbled at his ear for a second or so, butthen slowly turned goggle-eyed with wonder. he was experiencing the aural
equivalent of looking at a picture of two black silhouetted faces and suddenly
seeing it as a picture of a white candlestick. or of looking at a lot of coloured
dots on a piece of paper which suddenly resolve themselves into the gure
six and mean that your optician is going to charge you a lot of money for a
new pair of glasses.

he was still listening to the howling gargles, he knew that, only now it

had taken on the semblance of perfectly straightforward english.

this is what he heard . . .

howl howl gargle howl gargle howl howl howl gargle howl gargle howl howl
gargle gargle howl gargle gargle gargle howl slurrp uuuurgh should have a
good time. message repeats. this is your captain speaking, so stop whatever
youre doing and pay attention. first of all i see from our instruments that
we have a couple of hitchhikers aboard. hello wherever you are. i just want
to make it totally clear that you are not at all welcome. i worked hard to
get where i am today, and i didnt become captain of a vogon constructor
ship simply so i could turn it into a taxi service for a load of degenerate
freeloaders. i have sent out a search party, and as soon that they nd you i
will put you o the ship. if youre very lucky i might read you some of my
poetry rst.

secondly, we are about to jump into hyperspace for the journey to
barnards star. on arrival we will stay in dock for a seventy-two hour ret,
and no ones to leave the ship during that time. i repeat, all planet leave is
cancelled. ive just had an unhappy love aair, so i dont see why anybody
else should have a good time. message ends.

the noise stopped.
arthur discovered to his embarrassment that he was lying curled up in
a small ball on the oor with his arms wrapped round his head. he smiled
weakly.

charming man, he said. i wish i had a daughter so i could forbid her

to marry one . . . 

you wouldnt need to, said ford. theyve got as much sex appeal as a
road accident. no, dont move, he added as arthur began to uncurl himself,
youd better be prepared for the jump into hyperspace. its unpleasantly
like being drunk.

whats so unpleasant about being drunk?
you ask a glass of water.
arthur thought about this.
ford, he said.yeah?
whats this sh doing in my ear?
its translating for you. its a babel sh. look it up in the book if you

like.

he tossed over the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy and then curled

himself up into a foetal ball to prepare himself for the jump.

at that moment the bottom fell out of arthurs mind.
his eyes turned inside out. his feet began to leak out of the top of his

head.

the room folded at about him, spun around, shifted out of existence

and left him sliding into his own navel.

they were passing through hyperspace.
the babel sh, said the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy quietly, is
small, yellow and leech-like, and probably the oddest thing in the universe.
it feeds on brainwave energy not from its carrier but from those around it.
it absorbs all unconscious mental frequencies from this brainwave energy to
nourish itself with. it then excretes into the mind of its carrier a telepathic
matrix formed by combining the conscious thought frequencies with nerve
signals picked up from the speech centres of the brain which has supplied
them. the practical upshot of all this is that if you stick a babel sh in
your ear you can instantly understand anything said to you in any form of
language. the speech patterns you actually hear decode the brainwave matrix
which has been fed into your mind by your babel sh.

now it is such a bizarrely improbable coincidence that anything so mind-
boggingly useful could have evolved purely by chance that some thinkers have
chosen to see it as the nal and clinching proof of the non-existence of god.
the argument goes something like this: i refuse to prove that i exist,

says god, for proof denies faith, and without faith i am nothing.

but, says man, the babel sh is a dead giveaway, isnt it? it could
not have evolved by chance. it proves you exist, and so therefore, by your
own arguments, you dont. qed.

oh dear, says god, i hadnt thought of that, and promptly vanished

in a pu of logic.

oh, that was easy, says man, and for an encore goes on to prove that

black is white and gets himself killed on the next zebra crossing.

most leading theologians claim that this argument is a load of dingos
kidneys, but that didnt stop oolon colluphid making a small fortune when
he used it as the central theme of his bestselling book well that about wraps
it up for god.

meanwhile, the poor babel sh, by eectively removing all barriers to
communication between dierent races and cultures, has caused more andbloddier wars than anything else in the history of creation.

arthur let out a low groan. he was horried to discover that the kick
through hyperspace hadnt killed him. he was now six light years from the
place that the earth would have been if it still existed.

the earth.
visions of it swam sickeningly through his nauseated mind. there was no
way his imagination could feel the impact of the whole earth having gone,
it was too big. he prodded his feelings by thinking that his parents and
his sister had gone. no reaction. he thought of all the people he had been
close to. no reaction. then he thought of a complete stranger he had been
standing behind in the queue at the supermarket before and felt a sudden
stab  the supermarket was gone, everything in it was gone. nelsons column
had gone! nelsons column had gone and there would be no outcry, because
there was no one left to make an outcry. from now on nelsons column only
existed in his mind. england only existed in his mind  his mind, stuck here
in this dank smelly steel-lined spaceship. a wave of claustrophobia closed in
on him.

england no longer existed. hed got that  somehow hed got it. he tried
again. america, he thought, has gone. he couldnt grasp it. he decided to
start smaller again. new york has gone. no reaction. hed never seriously
believed it existed anyway. the dollar, he thought, had sunk for ever. slight
tremor there. every bogart movie has been wiped, he said to himself, and
that gave him a nasty knock. mcdonalds, he thought. there is no longer
any such thing as a mcdonalds hamburger.

he passed out. when he came round a second later he found he was

sobbing for his mother.

he jerked himself violently to his feet.
ford!
ford looked up from where he was sitting in a corner humming to him-
self. he always found the actual travelling-through-space part of space travel
rather trying.

yeah? he said.
if youre a researcher on this book thing and you were on earth, you

must have been gathering material on it.

well, i was able to extend the original entry a bit, yes.
let me see what it says in this edition then, ive got to see it.
yeah ok. he passed it over again.
arthur grabbed hold of it and tried to stop his hands shaking. he pressed
the entry for the relevant page. the screen ashed and swirled and resolved
into a page of print. arthur stared at it.

it doesnt have an entry! he burst out.ford looked over his shoulder.
yes it does, he said, down there, see at the bottom of the screen, just

under eccentrica gallumbits, the triple-breasted whore of eroticon 6.

arthur followed fords nger, and saw where it was pointing. for a

moment it still didnt register, then his mind nearly blew up.

what? harmless? is that all its got to say? harmless! one word!
ford shrugged. well, there are a hundred billion stars in the galaxy,
and only a limited amount of space in the books microprocessors, he said,
and no one knew much about the earth of course.

well for gods sake i hope you managed to rectify that a bit.
oh yes, well i managed to transmit a new entry o to the editor. he

had to trim it a bit, but its still an improvement.

and what does it say now? asked arthur.
mostly harmless, admitted ford with a slightly embarrassed cough.
mostly harmless! shouted arthur.
what was that noise? hissed ford.
it was me shouting, shouted arthur.
no! shut up! said ford. i think were in trouble.
you think were in trouble!
outside the door were the sounds of marching feet. the dentrassi?

whispered arthur.

no, those are steel tipped boots, said ford.
there was a sharp ringing rap on the door.
then who is it? said arthur.
well, said ford, if were lucky its just the vogons come to throw us

in to space.

and if were unlucky?
if were unlucky, said ford grimly, the captain might be serious in his

threat that hes going to read us some of his poetry rst . . . 

vogon poetry is of course the third worst in the universe. the second worst
is that of the azagoths of kria. during a recitation by their poet master
grunthos the flatulent of his poem ode to a small lump of green putty i
found in my armpit one midsummer morning four of his audience died of
internal haemorrhaging, and the president of the mid-galactic arts nobbling
council survived by gnawing one of his own legs o. grunthos is reported
to have been disappointed by the poems reception, and was about to
embark on a reading of his twelvebook epic entitled my favourite bathtime
gurgles when his own major intestine, in a desperate attempt to save life
and civilization, leapt straight up through his neck and throttled his brain.
the very worst poetry of all perished along with its creator paula nancy
millstone jennings of greenbridge, essex, england in the destruction of the
planet earth.

prostetnic vogon jeltz smiled very slowly. this was done not so much for
eect as because he was trying to remember the sequence of muscle move-
ments. he had had a terribly therapeutic yell at his prisoners and was now
feeling quite relaxed and ready for a little callousness.

the prisoners sat in poetry appreciation chairs  strapped in. vogons
suered no illusions as to the regard their works were generally held in. their
early attempts at composition had been part of bludgeoning insistence that
they be accepted as a properly evolved and cultured race, but now the only
thing that kept them going was sheer bloodymindedness.

the sweat stood out cold on ford prefects brow, and slid round the
electrodes strapped to his temples. these were attached to a battery of
electronic equipment  imagery intensiers, rhythmic modulators, alliterative
residulators and simile dumpers  all designed to heighten the experience of
the poem and make sure that not a single nuance of the poets thought was
lost.

arthur dent sat and quivered. he had no idea what he was in for, buthe knew that he hadnt liked anything that had happened so far and didnt
think things were likely to change.

the vogon began to read  a fetid little passage of his own devising.
oh freddled gruntbuggly . . .  he began. spasms wracked fords body 

this was worse than ever hed been prepared for.

? . . . thy micturations are to me  as plurdled gabbleblotchits on a lurgid

bee.

aaaaaaarggggghhhhhh! went ford prefect, wrenching his head back as
lumps of pain thumped through it. he could dimly see beside him arthur
lolling and rolling in his seat. he clenched his teeth.

groop i implore thee, continued the merciless vogon, my foonting

turlingdromes.

his voice was rising to a horrible pitch of impassioned stridency. and
hooptiously drangle me with crinkly bindlewurdles,/ or i will rend thee in the
gobberwarts with my blurglecruncheon, see if i dont!

nnnnnnnnnnyyyyyyyuuuuuuurrrrrrrggggggghhhhh! cried ford prefect
and threw one nal spasm as the electronic enhancement of the last line
caught him full blast across the temples. he went limp.

arthur lolled.
now earthlings . . .  whirred the vogon (he didnt know that ford pre-
fect was in fact from a small planet in the vicinity of betelgeuse, and wouldnt
have cared if he had) i present you with a simple choice! either die in the
vacuum of space, or . . .  he paused for melodramatic eect, tell me how
good you thought my poem was!

he threw himself backwards into a huge leathery bat-shaped seat and

watched them. he did the smile again.

ford was rasping for breath. he rolled his dusty tongue round his parched

mouth and moaned.

arthur said brightly: actually i quite liked it.
ford turned and gaped. here was an approach that had quite simply not

occurred to him.

the vogon raised a surprised eyebrow that eectively obscured his nose

and was therefore no bad thing.

oh good . . .  he whirred, in considerable astonishment.
oh yes, said arthur, i thought that some of the metaphysical imagery

was really particularly eective.

ford continued to stare at him, slowly organizing his thoughts around
this totally new concept. were they really going to be able to bareface their
way out of this?

yes, do continue . . .  invited the vogon.oh . . . and, er . . . interesting rhythmic devices too, continued arthur,

which seemed to counterpoint the . . . er . . . er . . .  he oundered.

ford leaped to his rescue, hazarding counterpoint the surrealism of the
underlying metaphor of the . . . er . . .  he oundered too, but arthur was
ready again.

. . . humanity of the . . . 
vogonity, ford hissed at him.
ah yes, vogonity  sorry  of the poets compassionate soul,  arthur
felt he was on a home stretch now  ,which contrives through the medium of
the verse structure to sublimate this, transcend that, and come to terms with
the fundamental dichotomies of the other,  he was reaching a triumphant
crescendo  and one is left with a profound and vivid insight into . . . into
. . . er . . .  (which suddenly gave out on him.)

ford leaped in with the coup de grace:
into whatever it was the poem was about! he yelled. out of the corner

of his mouth: well done, arthur, that was very good.

the vogon perused them. for a moment his embittered racial soul had
been touched, but he thought no  too little too late. his voice took on the
quality of a cat snagging brushed nylon.

so what youre saying is that i write poetry because underneath my
mean callous heartless exterior i really just want to be loved, he said. he
paused. is that right?

ford laughed a nervous laugh. well i mean yes, he said, dont we all,

deep down, you know . . . er . . . 

the vogon stood up.
no, well youre completely wrong, he said, i just write poetry to throw
my mean callous heartless exterior into sharp relief. im going to throw you
o the ship anyway. guard! take the prisoners to number three airlock and
throw them out!

what? shouted ford.
a huge young vogon guard stepped forward and yanked them out of their

straps with his huge blubbery arms.

you cant throw us into space, yelled ford, were trying to write a

book.

resistance is useless! shouted the vogon guard back at him. it was the

rst phrase hed learnt when he joined the vogon guard corps.

the captain watched with detached amusement and then turned away.
arthur stared round him wildly.
i dont want to die now! he yelled. ive still got a headache! i dont
want to go to heaven with a headache, id be all cross and wouldnt enjoy
it!the guard grasped them both rmly round the neck, and bowing defer-
entially towards his captains back, hoiked them both protesting out of the
bridge. a steel door closed and the captain was on his own again. he hummed
quietly and mused to himself, lightly ngering his notebook of verses.

hmmmm, he said, counterpoint the surrealism of the underlying metaphor

. . .  he considered this for a moment, and then closed the book with a grim
smile.

deaths too good for them, he said.

the long steel-lined corridor echoed to the feeble struggles of the two

humanoids clamped rmly under rubbery vogon armpits.

this is great, spluttered arthur, this is really terric. let go of me

you brute!

the vogon guard dragged them on.
dont you worry, said ford, ill think of something. he didnt sound

hopeful.

resistance is useless! bellowed the guard.
just dont say things like that, stammered ford. how can anyone

maintain a positive mental attitude if youre saying things like that?

my god, complained arthur, youre talking about a positive mental
attitude and you havent even had your planet demolished today. i woke up
this morning and thought id have a nice relaxed day, do a bit of reading,
brush the dog . . . its now just after four in the afternoon and im already
thrown out of an alien spaceship six light years from the smoking remains of
the earth! he spluttered and gurgled as the vogon tightened his grip.

all right, said ford, just stop panicking.
who said anything about panicking? snapped arthur. this is still
just the culture shock. you wait till ive settled down into the situation and
found my bearings. then ill start panicking.

arthur youre getting hysterical. shut up! ford tried desperately to

think, but was interrupted by the guard shouting again.

resistance is useless!
and you can shut up as well! snapped ford.
resistance is useless!
oh give it a rest, said ford. he twisted his head till he was looking

straight up into his captors face. a thought struck him.

do you really enjoy this sort of thing? he asked suddenly.
the vogon stopped dead and a look of immense stupidity seeped slowly

over his face.

enjoy? he boomed. what do you mean?what i mean, said ford, is does it give you a full satisfying life?

stomping around, shouting, pushing people out of spaceships . . . 

the vogon stared up at the low steel ceiling and his eyebrows almost
rolled over each other. his mouth slacked. finally he said, well the hours
are good . . . 

theyd have to be, agreed ford.
arthur twisted his head to look at ford.
ford, what are you doing? he asked in an amazed whisper.
oh, just trying to take an interest in the world around me, okay? he

said. so the hours are pretty good then? he resumed.

the vogon stared down at him as sluggish thoughts moiled around in the

murky depths.

yeah, he said, but now you come to mention it, most of the actual
minutes are pretty lousy. except . . .  he thought again, which required
looking at the ceiling  except some of the shouting i quite like. he lled
his lungs and bellowed, resistance is . . . 

sure, yes, interrupted ford hurriedly, youre good at that, i can tell.
but if its mostly lousy, he said, slowly giving the words time to reach their
mark, then why do you do it? what is it? the girls? the leather? the
machismo? or do you just nd that coming to terms with the mindless
tedium of it all presents an interesting challenge?

arthur looked backward and forward between them in baement.
er . . .  said the guard, er . . . er . . . i dunno. i think i just sort of . . . do
it really. my aunt said that spaceship guard was a good career for a young
vogon  you know, the uniform, the lowslung stun ray holster, the mindless
tedium . . . 

there you are, arthur, said ford with the air of someone reaching the

conclusion of his argument, you think youve got problems.

arthur rather thought he had. apart from the unpleasant business with
his home planet the vogon guard had half-throttled him already and he
didnt like the sound of being thrown into space very much.

try and understand his problem, insisted ford. here he is poor lad,
his entire lifes work is stamping around, throwing people o spaceships . . . 

and shouting, added the guard.
and shouting, sure, said ford patting the blubbery arm clamped round
his neck in friendly condescension, . . . and he doesnt even know why hes
doing it!

arthur agreed this was very sad. he did this with a small feeble gesture,

because he was too asphyxicated to speak.

deep rumblings of bemusement came from the guard.
well. now you put it like that i suppose . . . good lad! encouraged ford.
but alright, went on the rumblings, so whats the alternative?
well, said ford, brightly but slowly, stop doing it of course! tell
them, he went on, youre not going to do it anymore. he felt he had to
add something to that, but for the moment the guard seemed to have his
mind occupied pondering that much.

eerrrrrrmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm . . .  said the guard, erm,

well that doesnt sound that great to me.

ford suddenly felt the moment slipping away.
now wait a minute, he said, thats just the start you see, theres more

to it than that you see . . . 

but at that moment the guard renewed his grip and continued his orig-
inal purpose of lugging his prisoners to the airlock. he was obviously quite
touched.

no, i think if its all the same to you, he said, id better get you
both shoved into this airlock and then go and get on with some other bits of
shouting ive got to do.

it wasnt all the same to ford prefect after all.
come on now . . . but look! he said, less slowly, less brightly.
huhhhhgggggggnnnnnnn . . .  said arthur without any clear inection.
but hang on, pursued ford, theres music and art and things to tell

you about yet! arrrggghhh!

resistance is useless, bellowed the guard, and then added, you see
if i keep it up i can eventually get promoted to senior shouting ocer,
and there arent usually many vacancies for non-shouting and non-pushing-
people-about ocers, so i think id better stick to what i know.

they had now reached the airlock  a large circular steel hatchway of
massive strength and weight let into the inner skin of the craft. the guard
operated a control and the hatchway swung smoothly open.

but thanks for taking an interest, said the vogon guard. bye now. he
ung ford and arthur through the hatchway into the small chamber within.
arthur lay panting for breath. ford scrambled round and ung his shoulder
uselessly against the reclosing hatchway.

but listen, he shouted to the guard, theres a whole world you dont
know anything about . . . here how about this? desperately he grabbed
for the only bit of culture he knew ohand  he hummed the rst bar of
beethovens fifth.

da da da dum! doesnt that stir anything in you?
no, said the guard, not really. but ill mention it to my aunt.
if he said anything further after that it was lost. the hatchway sealed
itself tight, and all sound was lost but the faint distant hum of the shipsengines.

they were in a brightly polished cylindrical chamber about six feet in

diameter and ten feet long.

ford looked round it, panting.
potentially bright lad i thought, he said and slumped against the curved

wall.

arthur was still lying in the curve of the oor where he had fallen. he

didnt look up. he just lay panting.
were trapped now arent we?
yes, said ford, were trapped.
well didnt you think of anything? i thought you said you were going to

think of something. perhaps you thought of something and didnt notice.

oh yes, i thought of something, panted ford.
arthur looked up expectantly.
but unfortunately, continued ford, it rather involved being on the
other side of this airtight hatchway. he kicked the hatch theyd just been
through.

but it was a good idea was it?
oh yes, very neat.
what was it?
well i hadnt worked out the details yet. not much point now is there?
so . . . er, what happens next?
oh, er, well the hatchway in front of us will open automatically in a few
moments and we will shoot out into deep space i expect and asphyxicate.
if you take a lungful of air with you you can last for up to thirty seconds
of course . . .  said ford. he stuck his hands behind his back, raised his
eyebrows and started to hum an old betelgeusian battle hymn. to arthurs
eyes he suddenly looked very alien.

so this is it, said arthur, were going to die.
yes, said ford, except . . . no! wait a minute!
he suddenly lunged across the chamber at something behind arthurs

line of vision. whats this switch? he cried.

what? where? cried arthur twisting round.
no, i was only fooling, said ford, we are going to die after all.
he slumped against the wall again and carried on the tune from where

he left o.

you know, said arthur, its at times like this, when im trapped in a
vogon airlock with a man from betelgeuse, and about to die of asphyxication
in deep space that i really wish id listened to what my mother told me when
i was young.

why, what did she tell you?i dont know, i didnt listen.
oh. ford carried on humming.
this is terric, arthur thought to himself, nelsons column has gone,
mcdonalds have gone, all thats left is me and the words mostly harmless.
any second now all that will be left is mostly harmless. and yesterday the
planet seemed to be going so well.

a motor whirred.
a slight hiss built into a deafening roar of rushing air as the outer hatch-
way opened on to an empty blackness studded with tiny impossibly bright
points of light. ford and arthur popped into outer space like corks from a
toy gun.

the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy is a wholly remarkable book. it has
been compiled and recompiled many times over many years and under many
dierent editorships.
it contains contributions from countless numbers of
travellers and researchers.

the introduction begins like this:
space, it says, is big. really big. you just wont believe how vastly
hugely mindboggingly big it is. i mean you may think its a long way down
the road to the chemist, but thats just peanuts to space. listen . . .  and so
on.

(after a while the style settles down a bit and it begins to tell you things
you really need to know, like the fact that the fabulously beautiful planet beth-
selamin is now so worried about the cumulative erosion by ten billion visit-
ing tourists a year that any net imbalance between the amount you eat and
the amount you excrete whilst on the planet is surgically removed from your
bodyweight when you leave: so every time you go to the lavatory it is vitally
important to get a receipt.)

to be fair though, when confronted by the sheer enormity of distances
between the stars, better minds than the one responsible for the guides in-
troduction have faltered. some invite you to consider for a moment a peanut
in reading and a small walnut in johannesburg, and other such dizzying con-
cepts.

the simple truth is that interstellar distances will not t into the human

imagination.

even light, which travels so fast that it takes most races thousands of
years to realize that it travels at all, takes time to journey between the stars.
it takes eight minutes from the star sol to the place where the earth used to
be, and four years more to arrive at sols nearest stellar neighbour, alpha
proxima.

for light to reach the other side of the galaxy, for it to reach damogran

for instance, takes rather longer: ve hundred thousand years.the record for hitch hiking this distance is just under ve years, but you

dont get to see much on the way.

the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy says that if you hold a lungful of
air you can survive in the total vacuum of space for about thirty seconds.
however it goes on to say that what with space being the mind boggling size it
is the chances of getting picked up by another ship within those thirty seconds
are two to the power of two hundred and sixty-seven thousand seven hundred
and nine to one against.

by a totally staggering coincidence that is also the telephone number of
an islington at where arthur once went to a very good party and met a
very nice girl whom he totally failed to get o with  she went o with a
gatecrasher.

though the planet earth, the islington at and the telephone have all
now been demolished, it is comforting to reect that they are all in some
small way commemorated by the fact that twenty-nine seconds later ford and
arthur were rescued.

a computer chatted to itself in alarm as it noticed an airlock open and close
itself for no apparent reason.

this was because reason was in fact out to lunch. a hole had just
appeared in the galaxy.
it was exactly a nothingth of a second long, a
nothingth of an inch wide, and quite a lot of million light years from end to
end.

as it closed up lots of paper hats and party balloons fell out of it and
drifted o through the universe. a team of seven threefoot-high market
analysts fell out of it and died, partly of asphyxication, partly of surprise.

two hundred and thirty-nine thousand lightly fried eggs fell out of it too,
materializing in a large woobly heap on the faminestruck land of poghril in
the pansel system.

the whole poghril tribe had died out from famine except for one last man

who died of cholesterol poisoning some weeks later.

the nothingth of a second for which the hole existed reverberated back-
wards and forwards through time in a most improbable fashion. somewhere
in the deeply remote past it seriously traumatized a small random group of
atoms drifting through the empty sterility of space and made them cling to-
gether in the most extraordinarily unlikely patterns. these patterns quickly
learnt to copy themselves (this was part of what was so extraordinary of the
patterns) and went on to cause massive trouble on every planet they drifted
on to. that was how life began in the universe.

five wild event maelstroms swirled in vicious storms of unreason and

spewed up a pavement.

on the pavement lay ford prefect and arthur dent gulping like half-spent

sh.

there you are, gasped ford, scrabbling for a ngerhold on the pavement
as it raced through the third reach of the unknown, i told you id think
of something.

oh sure, said arthur, sure.bright idea of mine, said ford, to nd a passing spaceship and get

rescued by it.

the real universe arched sickeningly away beneath them. various pretend
ones itted silently by, like mountain goats. primal light exploded, splatter-
ing space-time as with gobbets of junket. time blossomed, matter shrank
away. the highest prime number coalesced quietly in a corner and hid itself
away for ever.

oh come o it, said arthur, the chances against it were astronomical.
dont knock it, it worked, said ford.
what sort of ship are we in? asked arthur as the pit of eternity yawned

beneath them.

i dont know, said ford, i havent opened my eyes yet.
no, nor have i, said arthur.
the universe jumped, froze, quivered and splayed out in several unex-

pected directions.

arthur and ford opened their eyes and looked about in considerable sur-

prise.

good god, said arthur, it looks just like the sea front at southend.
hell, im relieved to hear you say that, said ford.
why?
because i thought i must be going mad.
perhaps you are. perhaps you only thought i said it.
ford thought about this.
well, did you say it or didnt you? he asked.
i think so, said arthur.
well, perhaps were both going mad.
yes, said arthur, wed be mad, all things considered, to think this was

southend.

well, do you think this is southend?
oh yes.
so do i.
therefore we must be mad.
nice day for it.
yes, said a passing maniac. who was that? asked arthur who 

the man with the ve heads and the elderberry bush full of kippers?

yes, said a passing maniac.
who was that? asked arthur.
who  the man with the ve heads and the elderberry bush full of

kippers?
yes.
i dont know. just someone.ah.
they both sat on the pavement and watched with a certain unease as
huge children bounced heavily along the sand and wild horses thundered
through the sky taking fresh supplies of reinforced railings to the uncertain
areas.

you know, said arthur with a slight cough, if this is southend, theres

something very odd about it . . . 

you mean the way the sea stays steady and the buildings keep washing
up and down? said ford. yes i thought that was odd too. in fact, he con-
tinued as with a huge bang southend split itself into six equal segments which
danced and span giddily round each other in lewd and licentious formation,
there is something altogether very strange going on.

wild yowling noises of pipes and strings seared through the wind, hot
doughnuts popped out of the road for ten pence each, horrid sh stormed
out of the sky and arthur and ford decided to make a run for it.

they plunged through heavy walls of sound, mountains of archaic thought,
valleys of mood music, bad shoe sessions and footling bats and suddenly heard
a girls voice.

it sounded quite a sensible voice, but it just said, two to the power of

one hundred thousand to one against and falling, and that was all.

ford skidded down a beam of light and span round trying to nd a source

for the voice but could see nothing he could seriously believe in.

what was that voice? shouted arthur.
i dont know, yelled ford, i dont know. it sounded like a measurement

of probability.

probability? what do you mean?
probability. you know, like two to one, three to one, ve to four against.
it said two to the power of one hundred thousand to one against. thats
pretty improbable you know.

a million-gallon vat of custard upended itself over them without warning.
but what does it mean? cried arthur.
what, the custard?
no, the measurement of probability!
i dont know. i dont know at all. i think were on some kind of space-

ship.

i can only assume, said arthur, that this is not the rstclass compart-

ment.

bulges appeared in the fabric of space-time. great ugly bulges.
haaaauuurrgghhh . . .  said arthur as he felt his body softening and
bending in unusual directions. southend seems to be melting away . . . the
stars are swirling . . . a dustbowl . . . my legs are drifting o into the sunset. . . my left arms come o too. a frightening thought struck him: hell, he
said, how am i going to operate my digital watch now? he wound his eyes
desperately around in fords direction.

ford, he said, youre turning into a penguin. stop it.
again came the voice.
two to the power of seventy-ve thousand to one against and falling.
ford waddled around his pond in a furious circle.
hey, who are you, he quacked. where are you? whats going on and

is there any way of stopping it?

please relax, said the voice pleasantly, like a stewardess in an airliner
with only one wing and two engines one of which is on re, you are perfectly
safe.

but thats not the point! raged ford. the point is that i am now
a perfectly save penguin, and my colleague here is rapidly running out of
limbs!

its alright, ive got them back now, said arthur.
two to the power of fty thousand to one against and falling, said the

voice.

admittedly, said arthur, theyre longer than i usually like them, but

. . . 

isnt there anything, squawked ford in avian fury, you feel you ought

to be telling us?

the voice cleared its throat. a giant petit four lolloped o into the

distance.

welcome, the voice said, to the starship heart of gold.

the voice continued.
please do not be alarmed, it said, by anything you see or hear around
you. you are bound to feel some initial ill eects as you have been rescued
from certain death at an improbability level of two to the power of two
hundred and seventy-six thousand to one against  possibly much higher.
we are now cruising at a level of two to the power of twenty-ve thousand
to one against and falling, and we will be restoring normality just as soon as
we are sure what is normal anyway. thank you. two to the power of twenty
thousand to one against and falling.

the voice cut out.
ford and arthur were in a small luminous pink cubicle.
ford was wildly excited.
arthur! he said, this is fantastic! weve been picked up by a ship
powered by the innite improbability drive! this is incredible!
i heard
rumors about it before! they were all ocially denied, but they must havedone it! theyve built the improbability drive! arthur, this is . . . arthur?
whats happening?

arthur had jammed himself against the door to the cubicle, trying to hold
it closed, but it was ill tting. tiny furry little hands were squeezing them-
selves through the cracks, their ngers were inkstained; tiny voices chattered
insanely.

arthur looked up.
ford! he said, theres an innite number of monkeys outside who want

to talk to us about this script for hamlet theyve worked out.

the innite improbability drive is a wonderful new method of crossing vast
interstellar distances in a mere nothingth of a second, without all that tedious
mucking about in hyperspace.

it was discovered by a lucky chance, and then developed into a governable
form of propulsion by the galactic governments research team on damo-
gran.

this, briey, is the story of its discovery.
the principle of generating small amounts of nite improbability by sim-
ply hooking the logic circuits of a bambleweeny 57 submeson brain to an
atomic vector plotter suspended in a strong brownian motion producer (say
a nice hot cup of tea) were of course well understood  and such genera-
tors were often used to break the ice at parties by making all the molecules
in the hostesss undergarments leap simultaneously one foot to the left, in
accordance with the theory of indeterminacy.

many respectable physicists said that they werent going to stand for this
 partly because it was a debasement of science, but mostly because they
didnt get invited to those sort of parties.

another thing they couldnt stand was the perpetual failure they en-
countered in trying to construct a machine which could generate the innite
improbability eld needed to ip a spaceship across the mind-paralysing dis-
tances between the furthest stars, and in the end they grumpily announced
that such a machine was virtually impossible.

then, one day, a student who had been left to sweep up the lab after a

particularly unsuccessful party found himself reasoning this way:

if, he thought to himself, such a machine is a virtual impossibility, then
it must logically be a nite improbability. so all i have to do in order to
make one is to work out exactly how improbable it is, feed that gure into
the nite improbability generator, give it a fresh cup of really hot tea . . . and
turn it on!

he did this, and was rather startled to discover that he had managed tocreate the long sought after golden innite improbability generator out of
thin air.

it startled him even more when just after he was awarded the galactic
institutes prize for extreme cleverness he got lynched by a rampaging mob
of respectable physicists who had nally realized that the one thing they
really couldnt stand was a smartass.

the improbability-proof control cabin of the heart of gold looked like a
perfectly conventional spaceship except that it was perfectly clean because
it was so new. some of the control seats hadnt had the plastic wrapping
taken o yet. the cabin was mostly white, oblong, and about the size of a
smallish restaurant. in fact it wasnt perfectly oblong: the two long walls
were raked round in a slight parallel curve, and all the angles and corners
were contoured in excitingly chunky shapes. the truth of the matter is that
it would have been a great deal simpler and more practical to build the cabin
as an ordinary three-dimensional oblong rom, but then the designers would
have got miserable. as it was the cabin looked excitingly purposeful, with
large video screens ranged over the control and guidance system panels on
the concave wall, and long banks of computers set into the convex wall. in
one corner a robot sat humped, its gleaming brushed steel head hanging
loosely between its gleaming brushed steel knees. it too was fairly new, but
though it was beautifully constructed and polished it somehow looked as if
the various parts of its more or less humanoid body didnt quite t properly.
in fact they tted perfectly well, but something in its bearing suggested that
they might have tted better.

zaphod beeblebrox paced nervously up and down the cabin, brushing his

hands over pieces of gleaming equipment and giggling with excitement.

trillian sat hunched over a clump of instruments reading o gures. her

voice was carried round the tannoy system of the whole ship.

five to one against and falling . . .  she said, four to one against and
falling . . . three to one . . . two . . . one . . . probability factor of one to one . . . we
have normality, i repeat we have normality. she turned her microphone o
 then turned it back on, with a slight smile and continued: anything you
still cant cope with is therefore your own problem. please relax. you will be
sent for soon.

zaphod burst out in annoyance: who are they trillian?
trillian span her seat round to face him and shrugged.just a couple of guys we seem to have picked up in open space, she

said. section zz9 plural z alpha.

yeah, well thats a very sweet thought trillian, complained zaphod,
but do you really think its wise under the circumstances? i mean, here we
are on the run and everything, we must have the police of half the galaxy
after us by now, and we stop to pick up hitchhikers. ok, so ten out of ten
for style, but minus several million for good thinking, yeah?

he tapped irritably at a control panel. trillian quietly moved his hand
before he tapped anything important. whatever zaphods qualities of mind
might include  dash, bravado, conceit  he was mechanically inept and could
easily blow the ship up with an extravagant gesture. trillian had come to
suspect that the main reason why he had had such a wild and successful life
that he never really understood the signicance of anything he did.

zaphod, she said patiently, they were oating unprotected in open

space . . . you wouldnt want them to have died would you?

well, you know . . . no. not as such, but . . . 
not as such? not die as such? but? trillian cocked her head on one

side.

well, maybe someone else might have picked them up later.
a second later and they would have been dead.
yeah, so if youd taken the trouble to think about the problem a bit

longer it would have gone away.

youd been happy to let them die?
well, you know, not happy as such, but . . . 
anyway, said trillian, turning back to the controls, i didnt pick them

up.

what do you mean? who picked them up then?
the ship did.
huh?
the ship did. all by itself.
huh?
while we were in improbability drive.
but thats incredible.
no zaphod. just very very improbable.
er, yeah.
look zaphod, she said, patting his arm, dont worry about the aliens.
theyre just a couple of guys i expect. ill send the robot down to get them
and bring them up here. hey marvin!

in the corner, the robots head swung up sharply, but then wobbled about
imperceptibly. it pulled itself up to its feet as if it was about ve pounds
heavier that it actually was, and made what an outside observer would havethought was a heroic eort to cross the room. it stopped in front of trillian
and seemed to stare through her left shoulder.

i think you ought to know im feeling very depressed, it said. its voice

was low and hopeless.

oh god, muttered zaphod and slumped into a seat.
well, said trillian in a bright compassionate tone, heres something

to occupy you and keep your mind o things.

it wont work, droned marvin, i have an exceptionally large mind.
marvin! warned trillian.
all right, said marvin, what do you want me to do?
go down to number two entry bay and bring the two aliens up here

under surveillance.

with a microsecond pause, and a nely calculated micromodulation of
pitch and timbre  nothing you could actually take oence at  marvin
managed to convey his utter contempt and horror of all things human.

just that? he said.
yes, said trillian rmly.
i wont enjoy it, said marvin.
zaphod leaped out of his seat.
shes not asking you to enjoy it, he shouted, just do it will you?
all right, said marvin like the tolling of a great cracked bell, ill do

it.

good . . .  snapped zaphod, great . . . thank you . . . 
marvin turned and lifted his at-topped triangular red eyes up towards

him.

im not getting you down at all am i? he said pathetically.
no no marvin, lilted trillian, thats just ne, really . . . 
i wouldnt like to think that i was getting you down.
no, dont worry about that, the lilt continued, you just act as comes

naturally and everything will be just ne.

youre sure you dont mind? probed marvin.
no no marvin, lilted trillian, thats just ne, really . . . just part of

life.

marvin ashed him an electronic look.
life, said marvin, dont talk to me about life.
he turned hopelessly on his heel and lugged himself out of the cabin.

with a satised hum and a click the door closed behind him

i dont think i can stand that robot much longer zaphod, growled

trillian.

the encyclopaedia galactica denes a robot as a mechanical apparatus
designed to do the work of a man. the marketing division of the siriuscybernetics corporation denes a robot as your plastic pal whos fun to
be with.

the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy denes the marketing division of
the sirius cybernetics corporation as a bunch of mindless jerks wholl be
the rst against the wall when the revolution comes, with a footnote to the
eect that the editors would welcome applications from anyone interested in
taking over the post of robotics correspondent.

curiously enough, an edition of the encyclopaedia galactica that had
the good fortune to fall through a time warp from a thousand years in the
future dened the marketing division of the sirius cybernetics corporation
as a bunch of mindless jerks who were the rst against the wall when the
revolution came.

the pink cubicle had winked out of existence, the monkeys had sunk away
to a better dimension. ford and arthur found themselves in the embarkation
area of the ship. it was rather smart.

i think the ships brand new, said ford.
how can you tell? asked arthur. have you got some exotic device for

measuring the age of metal?

no, i just found this sales brochure lying on the oor. its a lot of the

universe can be yours stu. ah! look, i was right.

ford jabbed at one of the pages and showed it to arthur.
it says: sensational new breakthrough in improbability physics. as soon
as the ships drive reaches innite improbability it passes through every point
in the universe. be the envy of other major governments. wow, this is big
league stu.

ford hunted excitedly through the technical specs of the ship, occasionally
gasping with astonishment at what he read  clearly galactic astrotechnology
had moved ahead during the years of his exile.

arthur listened for a short while, but being unable to understand the vast
majority of what ford was saying he began to let his mind wander, trailing
his ngers along the edge of an incomprehensible computer bank, he reached
out and pressed an invitingly large red button on a nearby panel. the panel
lit up with the words please do not press this button again. he shook himself.
listen, said ford, who was still engrossed in the sales brochure, they
a new generation of sirius
make a big thing of the ships cybernetics.
cybernetics corporation robots and computers, with the new gpp feature. 

gpp feature? said arthur. whats that?
oh, it says genuine people personalities.
oh, said arthur, sounds ghastly.
a voice behind them said, it is. the voice was low and hopeless and
accompanied by a slight clanking sound. they span round and saw an abjectsteel man standing hunched in the doorway.

what? they said.
ghastly, continued marvin, it all is. absolutely ghastly. just dont
even talk about it. look at this door, he said, stepping through it. the
irony circuits cut into his voice modulator as he mimicked the style of the
sales brochure. all the doors in this spaceship have a cheerful and sunny
disposition. it is their pleasure to open for you, and their satisfaction to close
again with the knowledge of a job well done.

as the door closed behind them it became apparent that it did indeed
have a satised sigh-like quality to it. hummmmmmmyummmmmmm ah!
it said.

marvin regarded it with cold loathing whilst his logic circuits chattered
with disgust and tinkered with the concept of directing physical violence
against it further circuits cut in saying, why bother? whats the point?
nothing is worth getting involved in. further circuits amused themselves by
analysing the molecular components of the door, and of the humanoids brain
cells. for a quick encore they measured the level of hydrogen emissions in
the surrounding cubic parsec of space and then shut down again in boredom.
a spasm of despair shook the robots body as he turned.

come on, he droned, ive been ordered to take you down to the bridge.
here i am, brain the size of a planet and they ask me to take you down to
the bridge. call that job satisfaction? cos i dont.

he turned and walked back to the hated door.
er, excuse me, said ford following after him, which government owns

this ship?

marvin ignored him.
you watch this door, he muttered, its about to open again. i can tell

by the intolerable air of smugness it suddenly generates.

with an ingratiating little whine the door slit open again and marvin

stomped through.

come on, he said.
the others followed quickly and the door slit back into place with pleased

little clicks and whirrs.

thank you the marketing division of the sirius cybernetics corpora-
tion, said marvin and trudged desolately up the gleaming curved corridor
that stretched out before them. lets build robots with genuine people
personalities, they said. so they tried it out with me.
im a personality
prototype. you can tell cant you?

ford and arthur muttered embarrassed little disclaimers.
i hate that door, continued marvin. im not getting you down at all

am i?which government . . .  started ford again.
no government owns it, snapped the robot, its been stolen.
stolen?
stolen? mimicked marvin.
who by? asked ford.
zaphod beeblebrox.
something extraordinary happened to fords face. at least ve entirely
separate and distinct expressions of shock and amazement piled up on it in a
jumbled mess. his left leg, which was in mid stride, seemed to have diculty
in nding the oor again. he stared at the robot and tried to entangle some
dartoid muscles.

zaphod beeblebrox . . . ? he said weakly.
sorry, did i say something wrong? said marvin, dragging himself on
regardless. pardon me for breathing, which i never do anyway so i dont
know why i bother to say it, oh god im so depressed. heres another of
those self-satised door. life! dont talk to me about life.

no one ever mentioned it, muttered arthur irritably. ford, are you

alright?

ford stared at him. did that robot say zaphod beeblebrox? he said.

a loud clatter of gunk music ooded through the heart of gold cabin as
zaphod searched the sub-etha radio wavebands for news of himself. the ma-
chine was rather dicult to operate. for years radios had been operated by
means of pressing buttons and turning dials; then as the technology became
more sophisticated the controls were made touch-sensitive  you merely had
to brush the panels with your ngers; now all you had to do was wave your
hand in the general direction of the components and hope. it saved a lot of
muscular expenditure of course, but meant that you had to sit infuriatingly
still if you wanted to keep listening to the same programme.

zaphod waved a hand and the channel switched again. more gunk music,
but this time it was a background to a news announcement. the news was
always heavily edited to t the rhythms of the music.

. . . and news brought to you here on the sub-etha wave band, broadcasting
around the galaxy around the clock, squawked a voice, and well be saying
a big hello to all intelligent life forms everywhere . . . and to everyone else out
there, the secret is to bang the rocks together, guys. and of course, the big
news story tonight is the sensational theft of the new improbability drive pro-
totype ship by none other than galactic president zaphod beeblebrox. and
the question everyones asking is . . . has the big z nally ipped? beeble-
brox, the man who invented the pan galactic gargle blaster, ex-condence
trickster, once described by eccentrica gallumbits as the best bang since the
big one, and recently voted the wort dressed sentinent being in the known
universe for the seventh time . . . has he got an answer this time? we asked
his private brain care specialist gag halfrunt . . . 

the music swirled and dived for a moment. another voice broke in,
presumably halfrunt. he said: vell, zaphods jist zis guy you know? but
got no further because an electric pencil ew across the cabin and through
the radios on/o sensitive airspace. zaphod turned and glared at trillian 
she had thrown the pencil.

hey, he said, what do you do that for?trillian was tapping her ngers on a screenful of gures.
ive just thought of something, she said.
yeah? worth interrupting a news bulletin about me for?
you hear enough about yourself as it is.
im very insecure. we know that.
can we drop your ego for a moment? this is important.
if theres anything more important than my ego around, i want it caught

and shot now. zaphod glared at her again, then laughed.

listen, she said, we picked up those couple of guys . . . 
what couple of guys?
the couple of guys we picked up.
oh, yeah, said zaphod, those couple of guys.
we picked them up in sector zz9 plural z alpha.
yeah? said zaphod and blinked. trillian said quietly, does that mean

anything to you?

mmmmm, said zaphod, zz9 plural z alpha. zz9 plural z alpha?
well? said trillian.
er . . . what does the z mean? said zaphod.
which one?
any one.
one of the major diculties trillian experienced in her relationship with
zaphod was learning to distinguish between him pretending to be stupid just
to get people o their guard, pretending to be stupid because he couldnt be
bothered to think and wanted someone else to do it for him, pretending to
be outrageously stupid to hide the fact that he actually didnt understand
what was going on, and really being genuinely stupid. he was renowned
for being amazingly clever and quite clearly was so  but not all the time,
which obviously worried him, hence the act. he proered people to be puz-
zled rather than contemptuous. this above all appeared to trillian to be
genuinely stupid, but she could no longer be bothered to argue about it.

she sighed and punched up a star map on the visiscreen so she could
make it simple for him, whatever his reasons for wanting it to be that way.

there, she pointed, right there.
hey . . . yeah! said zaphod.
well? she said.
well what?
parts of the inside of her head screamed at other parts of the inside of
her head. she said, very calmly, its the same sector you originally picked
me up in.

he looked at her and then looked back at the screen.hey, yeah, he said, now that is wild. we should have zapped straight
into the middle of the horsehead nebula. how did we come to be there? i
mean thats nowhere.

she ignored this.
improbability drive, she said patiently. you explained it to me your-

self. we pass through every point in the universe, you know that.

yeah, but thats one wild coincidence isnt it?
yes.
picking someone up at that point? out of the whole of the universe to

choose from? thats just too . . . i want to work this out. computer!

the sirius cybernetics corporation shipboard computer which controlled
and permeated every particle of the ship switched into communication mode.
hi there! it said brightly and simultaneously spewed out a tiny ribbon

of ticker tape just for the record. the ticker tape said, hi there!

oh god, said zaphod. he hadnt worked with this computer for long

but had already learned to loathe it.

the computer continued, brash and cheery as if it was selling detergent.
i want you to know that whatever your problem, i am here to help you

solve it.

yeah yeah, said zaphod. look, i think ill just use a piece of paper.
sure thing, said the computer, spilling out its message into a waste bin

at the same time, i understand. if you ever want . . . 

shut up! said zaphod, and snatching up a pencil sat down next to

trillian at the console.

okay, okay, said the computer in a hurt tone of voice and closed down

its speech channel again.

zaphod and trillian pored over the gures that the improbability ight

path scanner ashed silently up in front of them.

can we work out, said zaphod, from their point of view what the

improbability of their rescue was?

yes, thats a constant, said trillian, two to the power of two hundred

and seventy-six thousand seven hundred and nine to one against.

thats high. theyre two lucky lucky guys.
yes.
but relative to what we were doing when the ship picked them up . . . 
trillian punched up the gures. they showed tow-to-the powerof-innity-
minus-one (an irrational number that only has a conventional meaning in
improbability physics).

its pretty low, continued zaphod with a slight whistle.
yes, agreed trillian, and looked at him quizzically.thats one big whack of improbability to be accounted for. something
pretty improbable has got to show up on the balance sheet if its all going to
add up into a pretty sum.

zaphod scribbled a few sums, crossed them out and threw the pencil

away.

bats dos, i cant work it out.
well?
zaphod knocked his two heads together in irritation and gritted his teeth.
ok, he said. computer! the voice circuits sprang to life again. why
hello there! they said (ticker tape, ticker tape). all i want to do is make
your day nicer and nicer and nicer . . . 

yeah well shut up and work something out for me.
sure thing, chattered the computer, you want a probability forecast

based on . . . 

improbability data, yeah.
okay, the computer continued. heres an interesting little notion. did

you realize that most peoples lives are governed by telephone numbers?

a pained look crawled across one of zaphods faces and on to the other

one.

have you ipped? he said.
no, but you will when i tell you that . . . 
trillian gasped. she scrabbled at the buttons on the improbability ight

path screen.

telephone number? she said. did that thing say telephone number ?
numbers ashed up on the screen.
the computer had paused politely, but now it continued.
what i was about to say was that . . . 
dont bother please, said trillian.
look, what is this? said zaphod.
i dont know, said trillian, but those aliens  theyre on the way up to
the bridge with that wretched robot. can we pick them up on any monitor
cameras?

marvin trudged on down the corridor, still moaning.

and then of course ive got this terrible pain in all the diodes down my

left hand side . . . 

no? said arthur grimly as he walked along beside him. really?
oh yes, said marvin, i mean ive asked for them to be replaced but

no one ever listens.

i can imagine. vague whistling and humming noises were coming from
ford. well well well, he kept saying to himself, zaphod beeblebrox . . . 

suddenly marvin stopped, and held up a hand.
you know whats happened now of course?
no, what? said arthur, who didnt what to know.
weve arrived at another of those doors.
there was a sliding door let into the side of the corridor. marvin eyed it

suspiciously.

well? said ford impatiently. do we go through?
do we go through? mimicked marvin. yes. this is the entrance to the
bridge. i was told to take you to the bridge. probably the highest demand
that will be made on my intellectual capacities today i shouldnt wonder.

slowly, with great loathing, he stepped towards the door, like a hunter

stalking his prey. suddenly it slid open.

thank you, it said, for making a simple door very happy.
deep in marvins thorax gears ground.
funny, he intoned funerally, how just when you think life cant possibly

get any worse it suddenly does.

he heaved himself through the door and left ford and arthur staring at
each other and shrugging their shoulders. from inside they heard marvins
voice again.

i suppose you want to see the aliens now, he said. do you want me

to sit in a corner and rust, or just fall apart where im standing?

yeah, just show them in would you marvin? came another voice.arthur looked at ford and was astonished to see him laughing.
whats . . . ?
shhh, said ford, come in.
he stepped through into the bridge.
arthur followed him in nervously and was astonished to see a man lolling
back in a chair with his feet on a control console picking the teeth in his right-
hand head with his left hand. the right-hand head seemed to be thoroughly
preoccupied with this task, but the left-hand one was grinning a broad, re-
laxed, nonchalant grin. the number of things that arthur couldnt believe
he was seeing was fairly large. his jaw apped about at a loose end for a
while.

the peculiar man waved a lazy wave at ford and with an appalling af-
fectation of nonchalance said, ford, hi, how are you? glad you could drop
in.

ford was not going to be outcooled.
zaphod, he drawled, great to see you, youre looking well, the extra

arm suits you. nice ship youve stolen.

arthur goggled at him.
you mean you know this guy? he said, waving a wild nger at zaphod.
know him! exclaimed ford, hes . . .  he paused, and decided to do

the introductions the other way round.

oh, zaphod, this is a friend of mine, arthur dent, he said, i saved

him when his planet blew up.

oh sure, said zaphod, hi arthur, glad you could make it. his right-
hand head looked round casually, said hi and went back to having his teeth
picked.

ford carried on. and arthur, he said, this is my semi-cousin zaphod

beeb . . . 

weve met, said arthur sharply.
when youre cruising down the road in the fast lane and you lazily sail
past a few hard driving cars and are feeling pretty pleased with yourself
and then accidentally change down from fourth to rst instead of third thus
making your engine leap out of your bonnet in a rather ugly mess, it tends
to throw you o your stride in much the same way that this remark threw
ford prefect o his.

er . . . what?
i said weve met.
zaphod gave an awkward start of surprise and jabbed a gum sharply.
hey . . . er, have we? hey . . . er . . . 
ford rounded on arthur with an angry ash in his eyes. now he felt
he was back on home ground he suddenly began to resent having lumberedhimself with this ignorant primitive who knew as much about the aairs of
the galaxy as an ilford-based gnat knew about life in peking.

what do you mean youve met? he demanded. this is zaphod beeble-
brox from betelgeuse five you know, not bloody martin smith from croy-
don.

i dont care, said arthur coldly. weve met, havent we zaphod bee-

blebrox  or should i say . . . phil?

what! shouted ford.
youll have to remind me, said zaphod. ive a terrible memory for

species.

it was at a party, pursued arthur.
yeah, well i doubt that, said zaphod.
cool it will you arthur! demanded ford.
arthur would not be deterred. a party six months ago. on earth

. . . england . . . 

zaphod shook his head with a tight-lipped smile.
london, insisted arthur, islington.
oh, said zaphod with a guilty start, that party.
this wasnt fair on ford at all. he looked backwards and forwards be-
tween arthur and zaphod. what? he said to zaphod. you dont mean
to say youve been on that miserable planet as well do you?

no, of course not, said zaphod breezily. well, i may have just dropped

in briey, you know, on my way somewhere . . . 

but i was stuck there for fteen years!
well i didnt know that, did i?
but what were you doing there?
looking about, you know.
he gatecrashed a party, persisted arthur, trembling with anger, a

fancy dress party . . . 

it would have to be, wouldnt it? said ford.
at this party, persisted arthur, was a girl . . . oh well, look it doesnt

matter now. the whole place has gone up in smoke anyway . . . 

i wish youd stop sulking about that bloody planet, said ford. who

was the lady?

oh just somebody. well all right, i wasnt doing very well with her.
id been trying all evening. hell, she was something though. beautiful,
charming, devastatingly intelligent, at last id got her to myself for a bit and
was plying her with a bit of talk when this friend of yours barges up and says
hey doll, is this guy boring you? why dont you talk to me instead? im
from a dierent planet. i never saw her again.

zaphod? exclaimed ford.yes, said arthur, glaring at him and trying not to feel foolish. he
only had the two arms and the one head and he called himself phil, but . . . 
but you must admit he did turn out to be from another planet, said
trillian wandering into sight at the other end of the bridge. she gave arthur
a pleasant smile which settled on him like a ton of bricks and then turned
her attention to the ships controls again.

there was silence for a few seconds, and then out of the scrambled mess

of arthurs brain crawled some words.

tricia mcmillian? he said. what are you doing here?
same as you, she said, i hitched a lift. after all with a degree in maths
and another in astrophysics what else was there to do? it was either that or
the dole queue again on monday.

innity minus one, chattered the computer, improbability sum now

complete.

zaphod looked about him, at ford, at arthur, and then at trillian.
trillian, he said, is this sort of thing going to happen every time we

use the improbability drive?

very probably, im afraid, she said.

the heart of gold ed on silently through the night of space, now on con-
ventional photon drive. its crew of four were ill at ease knowing that they
had been brought together not of their own volition or by simple coincidence,
but by some curious principle of physics  as if relationships between people
were susceptible to the same laws that governed the relationships between
atoms and molecules.

as the ships articial night closed in they were each grateful to retire to

separate cabins and try to rationalize their thoughts.

trillian couldnt sleep. she sat on a couch and stared at a small cage which
contained her last and only links with earth  two white mice that she had
insisted zaphod let her bring. she had expected not to see the planet again,
but she was disturbed by her negative reaction to the planets destruction. it
seemed remote and unreal and she could nd no thoughts to think about it.
she watched the mice scurrying round the cage and running furiously in their
little plastic treadwheels till they occupied her whole attention. suddenly
she shook herself and went back to the bridge to watch over the tiny ashing
lights and gures that charted the ships progress through the void. she
wished she knew what it was she was trying not to think about.

zaphod couldnt sleep. he also wished he knew what it was that he
wouldnt let himself think about. for as long as he could remember hed
suered from a vague nagging feeling of being not all there. most of the time
he was able to put this thought aside and not worry about it, but it had been
re-awakened by the sudden inexplicable arrival of ford prefect and arthur
dent. somehow it seemed to conform to a pattern that he couldnt see.

ford couldnt sleep. he was too excited about being back on the road
again. fifteen years of virtual imprisonment were over, just as he was nally
beginning to give up hope. knocking about with zaphod for a bit promised
to be a lot of fun, though there seemed to be something faintly odd about his
semi-cousin that he couldnt put his nger on. the fact that he had become
president of the galaxy was frankly astonishing, as was the manner of hisleaving the post. was there a reason behind it? there would be no point in
asking zaphod, he never appeared to have a reason for anything he did at
all: he had turned unfathomably into an art form. he attacked everything
in life with a mixture of extraordinary genius and naive incompetence and it
was often dicult to tell which was which.

arthur slept: he was terribly tired.
there was a tap at zaphods door. it slid open.
zaphod . . . ?
yeah?
trillian stood outlined in an oval of light.
i think we just found what you came to look for.
hey, yeah?
ford gave up the attempt to sleep.

in the corner of his cabin was a
small computer screen and keyboard. he sat at it for a while and tried to
compose a new entry for the guide on the subject of vogons but couldnt
think of anything vitriolic enough so he gave that up too, wrapped a robe
round himself and went for a walk to the bridge.

as he entered he was surprised to see two gures hunched excitedly over

the instruments.

see? the ships about to move into orbit, trillian was saying. theres

a planet out there. its at the exact coordinates you predicted.

zaphod heard a noise and looked up.
ford! he hissed. hey, come and take a look at this.
ford went and had a look at it. it was a series of gures ashing over a

screen.

you recognize those galactic coordinates? said zaphod.
no.
ill give you a clue. computer!
hi gang! enthused the computer. this is getting real sociable isnt

it?

shut up, said zaphod, and show up the screens.
light on the bridge sank. pinpoints of light played across the consoles
and reected in four pairs of eyes that stared up at the external monitor
screens.

there was absolutely nothing on them.
recognize that? whispered zaphod.
ford frowned. er, no, he said.
what do you see?
nothing.
recognize it?
what are you talking about?were in the horsehead nebula. one whole vast dark cloud.
and i was meant to recognize that from a blank screen?
inside a dark nebula is the only place in the galaxy youd see a dark

screen.

very good.
zaphod laughed. he was clearly very excited about something, almost

childishly so.

hey, this is really terric, this is just far too much!
whats so great about being stuck in a dust cloud? said ford.
what would you reckon to nd here? urged zaphod.
nothing.
no stars? no planets?
no.
computer! shouted zaphod, rotate angle of vision through oneeighty

degrees and dont talk about it!

for a moment it seemed that nothing was happening, then a brightness
glowed at the edge of the huge screen. a red star the size of a small plate
crept across it followed quickly by another one  a binary system. then a
vast crescent sliced into the corner of the picture  a red glare shading away
into the deep black, the night side of the planet.

ive found it! cried zaphod, thumping the console. ive found it!
ford stared at it in astonishment.
what is it? he said.
that . . .  said zaphod, is the most improbable planet that ever ex-

isted.

(excerpt from the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy, page 634784, section
5a, entry: magrathea)

far back in the mists of ancient time, in the great and glorious days of
the former galactic empire, life was wild, rich and largely tax free. mighty
starships plied their way between exotic suns, seeking adventure and reward
amongst the furthest reaches of galactic space. in those days spirits were
brave, the stakes were high, men were real men, women were real women,
and small furry creatures from alpha centauri were real small furry creatures
from alpha centauri. and all dared to brave unknown terrors, to do mighty
deeds, to boldly split innitives that no man had split before  and thus was
the empire forged.

many men of course became extremely rich, but this was perfectly natural
and nothing to be ashamed of because no one was really poor  at least no
one worth speaking of. and for all the richest and most successful merchants
life inevitably became rather dull and niggly, and they began to imagine that
this was therefore the fault of the worlds theyd settled on  none of them was
entirely satisfactory: either the climate wasnt quite right in the later part of
the afternoon, or the day was half an hour too long, or the sea was exactly
the wrong shade of pink.

and thus were created the conditions for a staggering new form of special-
ist industry: custom-made luxury planet building. the home of this industry
was the planet magrathea, where hyperspatial engineers sucked matter through
white holes in space to form it into dream planets  gold planets, platinum
planets, soft rubber planets with lots of earthquakes  all lovingly made to
meet the exacting standards that the galaxys richest men naturally came to
expect.

but so successful was this venture that magrathea itself soon became the
richest planet of all time and the rest of the galaxy was reduced to abject
poverty. and so the system broke down, the empire collapsed, and a longsullen silence settled over a billion worlds, disturbed only by the pen scratch-
ings of scholars as they laboured into the night over smug little treaties on
the value of a planned political economy.

magrathea itself disappeared and its memory soon passed into the obscu-

rity of legend.

in these enlightened days of course, no one believes a word of it.

arthur awoke to the sound of argument and went to the bridge. ford was
waving his arms about.

youre crazy, zaphod, he was saying, magrathea is a myth, a fairy
story, its what parents tell their kids about at night if they want them to
grow up to become economists, its . . . 

and thats what we are currently in orbit around, insisted zaphod.
look, i cant help what you may personally be in orbit around, said

ford, but this ship . . . 

computer! shouted zaphod.
oh no . . . 
hi there! this is eddie your shipboard computer, and im feeling just
great guys, and i know im just going to get a bundle of kicks out of any
programme you care to run through me.

arthur looked inquiringly at trillian. she motioned him to come on in

but keep quiet.

computer, said zaphod, tell us again what our present trajectory is.
a real pleasure feller, it burbled; we are currently in orbit at an alti-

tude of three hundred miles around the legendary planet of magrathea.

proving nothing, said ford. i wouldnt trust that computer to speak

my weight.

i can do that for you, sure, enthused the computer, punching out more
tickertape. i can even work out you personality problems to ten decimal
places if it will help.

trillian interrupted.
zaphod, she said, any minute now we will be swinging round to the

daylight side of this planet, adding, whatever it turns out to be.

hey, what do you mean by that? the planets where i predicted it would

be isnt it?

yes, i know theres a planet there. im not arguing with anyone, its just
that i wouldnt know magrathea from any other lump of cold rock. dawnscoming up if you want it.

okay, okay, muttered zaphod, lets at least give our eyes a good time.

computer!

hi there! what can i . . . 
just shut up and give us a view of the planet again.
a dark featureless mass once more lled the screens  the planet rolling

away beneath them.

they watched for a moment in silence, but zaphod was dgety with

excitement.

we are now traversing the night side . . .  he said in a hushed voice. the

planet rolled on.

the surface of the planet is now three hundred miles beneath us . . .  he
continued. he was trying to restore a sense of occasion to what he felt should
have been a great moment. magrathea! he was piqued by fords sceptical
reaction. magrathea!

in a few seconds, he continued, we should see . . . there!
the moment carried itself. even the most seasoned star tramp cant help
but shiver at the spectacular drama of a sunrise seen from space, but a binary
sunrise is one of the marvels of the galaxy.

out of the utter blackness stabbed a sudden point of blinding light. it
crept up by slight degrees and spread sideways in a thin crescent blade, and
within seconds two suns were visible, furnaces of light, searing the black edge
of the horizon with white re. fierce shafts of colour streaked through the
thin atmosphere beneath them.

the res of dawn . . . ! breathed zaphod. the twin suns of soulianis

and rahm . . . !

or whatever, said ford quietly.
soulianis and rahm! insisted zaphod.
the suns blazed into the pitch of space and a low ghostly music oated
through the bridge: marvin was humming ironically because he hated hu-
mans so much.

as ford gazed at the spectacle of light before them excitement burnt
inside him, but only the excitement of seeing a strange new planet, it was
enough for him to see it as it was. it faintly irritated him that zaphod had
to impose some ludicrous fantasy on to the scene to make it work for him.
all this magrathea nonsense seemed juvenile. isnt it enough to see that a
garden is beautiful without having to believe that there are fairies at the
bottom of it too?

all this magrathea business seemed totally incomprehensible to arthur.

he edged up to trillian and asked her what was going on.i only know what zaphods told me, she whispered. apparently ma-
grathea is some kind of legend from way back which no one seriously believes
in. bit like atlantis on earth, except that the legends say the magratheans
used to manufacture planets.

arthur blinked at the screens and felt he was missing something impor-

tant. suddenly he realized what it was.

is there any tea on this spaceship? he asked.
more of the planet was unfolding beneath them as the heart of gold
streaked along its orbital path. the suns now stood high in the black sky,
the pyrotechnics of dawn were over, and the surface of the planet appeared
bleak and forbidding in the common light of day  grey, dusty and only
dimly contoured. it looked dead and cold as a crypt. from time to time
promising features would appear on the distant horizon  ravines, maybe
mountains, maybe even cities  but as they approached the lines would soften
and blur into anonymity and nothing would transpire. the planets surface
was blurred by time, by the slow movement of the thin stagnant air that had
crept across it for century upon century.

clearly, it was very very old.
a moment of doubt came to ford as he watched the grey landscape move
beneath them. the immensity of time worried him, he could feel it as a
presence. he cleared his throat.

well, even supposing it is . . . 
it is, said zaphod.
which it isnt, continued ford. what do you want with it anyway?

theres nothing there.

not on the surface, said zaphod.
all right, just supposing theres something. i take it youre not here for

the sheer industrial archaeology of it all. what are you after?

one of zaphods heads looked away. the other one looked round to see
what the rst was looking at, but it wasnt looking at anything very much.
well, said zaphod airily, its partly the curiosity, partly a sense of

adventure, but mostly i think its the fame and the money . . . 

ford glanced at him sharply. he got a very strong impression that zaphod

hadnt the faintest idea why he was there at all.

you know i dont like the look of that planet at all, said trillian shiv-

ering.

ah, take no notice, said zaphod, with half the wealth of the former

galactic empire stored on it somewhere it can aord to look frumpy.

bullshit, thought ford. even supposing this was the home of some an-
cient civilization now gone to dust, even supposing a number of exceedinglyunlikely things, there was no way that vast treasures of wealth were going to
be stored there in any form that would still have meaning now. he shrugged.

i think its just a dead planet, he said.
the suspense is killing me, said arthur testily.

stress and nervous tension are now serious social problems in all parts of
the galaxy, and it is in order that this situation should not in any way be
exacerbated that the following facts will now be revealed in advance.

the planet in question is in fact the legendary magrathea.
the deadly missile attack shortly to be launched by an ancient automatic
defence system will result merely in the breakage of three coee cups and a
micecage, the bruising of somebodys upper arm, and the untimely creation
and sudden demise of a bowl of petunias and an innocent sperm whale.

in order that some sense of mystery should still be preserved, no revelation
will yet be made concerning whose upper arm sustained the bruise. this
fact may safely be made the subject of suspense since it is of no signicance
whatsoever.

after a fairly shaky start to the day, arthurs mind was beginning to re-
assemble itself from the shellshocked fragments the previous day had left
him with. he had found a nutri-matic machine which had provided him
with a plastic cup lled with a liquid that was almost, but not quite, entirely
unlike tea. the way it functioned was very interesting. when the drink
button was pressed it made an instant but highly detailed examination of
the subjects taste buds, a spectroscopic analysis of the subjects metabolism
and then sent tiny experimental signals down the neural pathways to the
taste centres of the subjects brain to see what was likely to go down well.
however, no one knew quite why it did this because it invariably delivered
a cupful of liquid that was almost, but not quite, entirely unlike tea. the
nutri-matic was designed and manufactured by the sirius cybernetics cor-
poration whose complaints department now covers all the major land masses
of the rst three planets in the sirius tau star system.

arthur drank the liquid and found it reviving. he glanced up at the
screens again and watched a few more hundred miles of barren greyness slide
past. it suddenly occurred to him to ask a question which had been bothering
him.

is it safe? he said.
magratheas been dead for ve million years, said zaphod, of course
its safe. even the ghosts will have settled down and raised families by now.
at which point a strange and inexplicable sound thrilled suddenly through
the bridge  a noise as of a distant fanfare; a hollow, reedy, insubstantial
sound. it preceded a voice that was equally hollow, reedy and insubstantial.
the voice said greetings to you . . . 

someone from the dead planet was talking to them.
computer! shouted zaphod.
hi there!
what the photon is it?
oh, just some ve-million-year-old tape thats being broadcast at us.a what? a recording?
shush! said ford. its carrying on.
the voice was old, courteous, almost charming, but was underscored with

quite unmistakable menace.

this is a recorded announcement, it said, as im afraid were all out
at the moment. the commercial council of magrathea thanks you for your
esteemed visit . . . 

(a voice from ancient magrathea! shouted zaphod. okay, okay, said

ford.)

. . . but regrets, continued the voice, that the entire planet is temporarily
closed for business. thank you. if you would care to leave your name and
the address of a planet where you can be contacted, kindly speak when you
hear the tone.

a short buzz followed, then silence.
they want to get rid of us, said trillian nervously. what do we do?
its just a recording, said zaphod. we keep going. got that, com-

puter?

i got it, said the computer and gave the ship an extra kick of speed.
they waited.
after a second or so came the fanfare once again, and then the voice.
we would like to assure you that as soon as our business is resumed
announcements will be made in all fashionable magazines and colour supple-
ments, when our clients will once again be able to select from all thats best in
contemporary geography. the menace in the voice took on a sharper edge.
meanwhile we thank our clients for their kind interest and would ask them
to leave. now.

arthur looked round the nervous faces of his companions.
well, i suppose wed better be going then, hadnt we? he suggested.
shhh! said zaphod. theres absolutely nothing to be worried about.
then whys everyone so tense?
theyre just interested! shouted zaphod. computer, start a descent

into the atmosphere and prepare for landing.

this time the fanfare was quite perfunctory, the voice distinctly cold.
it is most gratifying, it said, that your enthusiasm for our planet con-
tinues unabated, and so we would like to assure you that the guided missiles
currently converging with your ship are part of a special service we extend
to all of our most enthusiastic clients, and the fully armed nuclear warheads
are of course merely a courtesy detail. we look forward to your custom in
future lives . . . thank you.

the voice snapped o.
oh, said trillian.er . . .  said arthur.
well? said ford.
look, said zaphod, will you get it into your heads? thats just a
recorded message. its millions of years old. it doesnt apply to us, get it?

what, said trillian quietly, about the missiles?
missiles? dont make me laugh.
ford tapped zaphod on the shoulder and pointed at the rear screen.
clear in the distance behind them two silver darts were climbing through
the atmosphere towards the ship. a quick change of magnication brought
them into close focus  two massively real rockets thundering through the
sky. the suddenness of it was shocking.

i think theyre going to have a very good try at applying to us, said

ford.

zaphod stared at them in astonishment.
hey this is terric! he said. someone down there is trying to kill us!
terric, said arthur.
but dont you see what this means?
yes. were going to die.
yes, but apart from that.
apart from that?
it means we must be on to something!
how soon can we get o it?
second by second the image of the missiles on the screen became larger.
they had swung round now on to a direct homing course so that all that
could be seen of them now was the warheads, head on.

as a matter of interest, said trillian, what are we going to do?
just keep cool, said zaphod.
is that all? shouted arthur.
no, were also going to . . . er . . . take evasive action! said zaphod with

a sudden access of panic. computer, what evasive action can we take?

er, none im afraid, guys, said the computer.
or something, said zaphod, . . . er . . .  he said.
there seems to be something jamming my guidance system, explained
the computer brightly, impact minus forty-ve seconds. please call me eddie
if it will help you to relax.

zaphod tried to run in several equally decisive directions simultaneously.

right! he said. er . . . weve got to get manual control of this ship.

can you y her? asked ford pleasantly.
no, can you?
no.
trillian, can you?no.
fine, said zaphod, relaxing. well do it together.
i cant either, said arthur, who felt it was time he began to assert

himself.

id guessed that, said zaphod. okay computer, i want full manual

control now.

you got it, said the computer.
several large desk panels slid open and banks of control consoles sprang up
out of them, showering the crew with bits of expanded polystyrene packaging
and balls of rolled-up cellophane: these controls had never been used before.

zaphod stared at them wildly.
okay, ford, he said, full retro thrust and ten degrees starboard. or

something . . . 

good luck guys, chirped the computer, impact minus thirty seconds

. . . 

ford leapt to the controls  only a few of them made any immediate sense
to him so he pulled those. the ship shook and screamed as its guidance
rocked jets tried to push it every which way simultaneously. he released half
of them and the ship span round in a tight arc and headed back the way it
had come, straight towards the oncoming missiles.

air cushions ballooned out of the walls in an instant as everyone was
thrown against them. for a few seconds the inertial forces held them attened
and squirming for breath, unable to move. zaphod struggled and pushed in
manic desperation and nally managed a savage kick at a small lever that
formed part of the guidance system.

the lever snapped o. the ship twisted sharply and rocketed upwards.
the crew were hurled violently back across the cabin. fords copy of the
hitchhikers guide to the galaxy smashed into another section of the control
console with the combined result that the guide started to explain to anyone
who cared to listen about the best ways of smuggling antarean parakeet
glands out of antares (an antarean parakeet gland stuck on a small stick is
a revolting but much sought after cocktail delicacy and very large sums of
money are often paid for them by very rich idiots who want to impress other
very rich idiots), and the ship suddenly dropped out of the sky like a stone.

it was of course more or less at this moment that one of the crew sustained
a nasty bruise to the upper arm. this should be emphasized because, as had
already been revealed, they escape otherwise completely unharmed and the
deadly nuclear missiles do not eventually hit the ship. the safety of the crew
is absolutely assured.

impact minus twenty seconds, guys . . .  said the computer.then turn the bloody engines back on! bawled zaphod. oh, sure
thing, guys, said the computer. with a subtle roar the engines cut back
in, the ship smoothly attened out of its dive and headed back towards the
missiles again.

the computer started to sing.
when you walk through the storm . . .  it whined nasally, hold your

head up high . . . 

zaphod screamed at it to shut up, but his voice was lost in the din of

what they quite naturally assumed was approaching destruction.

and dont . . . be afraid . . . of the dark! eddie wailed.
the ship, in attening out had in fact attened out upside down and
lying on the ceiling as they were it was now totally impossible for any of the
crew to reach the guidance systems.

at the end of the storm . . .  crooned eddie.
the two missiles loomed massively on the screens as they thundered to-

wards the ship.

is a golden sky . . . 
but by an extraordinarily lucky chance they had not yet fully corrected
their ight paths to that of the erratically weaving ship, and they passed
right under it.

and the sweet silver songs of the lark . . . revised impact time fteen

seconds fellas . . . walk on through the wind . . . 

the missiles banked round in a screeching arc and plunged back into

pursuit.

this is it, said arthur watching them. we are now quite denitely

going to die arent we?

i wish youd stop saying that, shouted ford. well, we are, arent we?
yes.
walk on through the rain . . .  sang eddie.
a thought struck arthur. he struggled to his feet. why doesnt anyone
turn on this improbability drive thing? he said. we could probably reach
that.

what are you crazy? said zaphod. without proper programming

anything could happen.

does that matter at this stage? shouted arthur.
though your dreams be tossed and blown . . .  sang eddie.
arthur scrambled up on to one end of the excitingly chunky pieces of

moulded contouring where the curve of the wall met the ceiling.

walk on, walk on, with hope in your heart . . . 
does anyone know why arthur cant turn on the improbability drive?

shouted trillian.and youll never walk alone . . . impact minus ve seconds, its been

great knowing you guys, god bless . . . youll ne . . . ver . . . walk . . . alone!

i said, yelled trillian, does anyone know . . .  the next thing that

happened was a mid-mangling explosion of noise and light.

and the next thing that happened after that was that the heart of gold
continued on its way perfectly normally with a rather fetchingly redesigned
interior. it was somewhat larger, and done out in delicate pastel shades of
green and blue. in the centre a spiral staircase, leading nowhere in particular,
stood in a spray of ferns and yellow owers and next to it a stone sundial
pedestal housed the main computer terminal. cunningly deployed lighting
and mirrors created the illusion of standing in a conservatory overlooking
a wide stretch of exquisitely manicured garden. around the periphery of
the conservatory area stood marble-topped tables on intricately beautiful
wrought-iron legs. as you gazed into the polished surface of the marble the
vague forms of instruments became visible, and as you touched them the
instruments materialized instantly under your hands. looked at from the
correct angles the mirrors appeared to reect all the required data readouts,
though it was far from clear where they were reected from. it was in fact
sensationally beautiful.

relaxing in a wickerwork sun chair, zaphod beeblebrox said, what the

hell happened?

well i was just saying, said arthur lounging by a small sh pool,
theres this improbability drive switch over here . . .  he waved at where it
had been. there was a potted plant there now.

but where are we? said ford who was sitting on the spiral staircase, a

nicely chilled pan galactic gargle blaster in his hand.

exactly where we were, i think . . .  said trillian, as all about them the
mirrors showed them an image of the blighted landscape of magrathea which
still scooted along beneath them.
zaphod leapt out of his seat.
then whats happened to the missiles? he said.
a new and astounding image appeared in the mirrors. they would
appear, said ford doubtfully, to have turned into a bowl of petunias and
a very surprised looking whale . . . at an improbability factor, cut in eddie, who hadnt changed a bit,
of eight million seven hundred and sixty-seven thousand one hundred and
twenty-eight to one against.

zaphod stared at arthur. did you think of that, earthman? he de-

manded.

well, said arthur, all i did was . . . 
thats very good thinking you know. turn on the improbability drive
for a second without rst activating the proong screens. hey kid you just
saved our lives, you know that?

oh, said arthur, well, it was nothing really . . . 
was it? said zaphod. oh well, forget it then. okay, computer, take

us in to land.

but . . . 
i said forget it.
another thing that got forgotten was the fact that against all probability
a sperm whale had suddenly been called into existence several miles above
the surface of an alien planet.

and since this is not a naturally tenable position for a whale, this poor
innocent creature had very little time to come to terms with its identity as a
whale before it then had to come to terms with not being a whale any more.
this is a complete record of its thoughts from the moment it began its

life till the moment it ended it.

ah . . . ! whats happening? it thought.
er, excuse me, who am i?
hello?
why am i here? whats my purpose in life?
what do i mean by who am i?
calm down, get a grip now . . . oh! this is an interesting sensation, what is
it? its a sort of . . . yawning, tingling sensation in my . . . my . . . well i suppose
id better start nding names for things if i want to make any headway in
what for the sake of what i shall call an argument i shall call the world, so
lets call it my stomach.

good. ooooh, its getting quite strong. and hey, whats about this
whistling roaring sound going past what im suddenly going to call my head?
perhaps i can call that . . . wind! is that a good name? itll do . . . perhaps i
can nd a better name for it later when ive found out what its for. it must
be something very important because there certainly seems to be a hell of a
lot of it. hey! whats this thing? this . . . lets call it a tail  yeah, tail. hey!
i can can really thrash it about pretty good cant i? wow! wow! that feels
great! doesnt seem to achieve very much but ill probably nd out what its
for later on. now  have i built up any coherent picture of things yet?no.
never mind, hey, this is really exciting, so much to nd out about, so

much to look forward to, im quite dizzy with anticipation . . .

or is it the wind?
there really is a lot of that now isnt it?
and wow! hey! whats this thing suddenly coming towards me very
fast? very very fast. so big and at and round, it needs a big wide sounding
name like . . . ow . . . ound . . . round . . . ground! thats it! thats a good name
 ground!

i wonder if it will be friends with me?
and the rest, after a sudden wet thud, was silence.
curiously enough, the only thing that went through the mind of the bowl
of petunias as it fell was oh no, not again. many people have speculated
that if we knew exactly why the bowl of petunias had thought that we would
know a lot more about the nature of the universe than we do now.

are we taking this robot with us? said ford, looking with distaste at
marvin who was standing in an awkward hunched posture in the corner
under a small palm tree.

zaphod glanced away from the mirror screens which presented a panoramic
view of the blighted landscape on which the heart of gold had now landed.

oh, the paranoid android, he said. yeah, well take him.
but what are supposed to do with a manically depressed robot?
you think youve got problems, said marvin as if he was addressing a
newly occupied con, what are you supposed to do if you are a manically
depressed robot? no, dont bother to answer that, im fty thousand times
more intelligent than you and even i dont know the answer. it gives me a
headache just trying to think down to your level.

trillian burst in through the door from her cabin.
my white mice have escaped! she said.
an expression of deep worry and concern failed to cross either of zaphods

faces.

nuts to your white mice, he said.
trillian glared an upset glare at him, and disappeared again.
it is possible that her remark would have commanded greater attention
had it been generally realized that human beings were only the third most
intelligent life form present on the planet earth, instead of (as was generally
thought by most independent observers) the second.

good afternoon boys.
the voice was oddly familiar, but oddly dierent. it had a matriarchal
twang. it announced itself to the crew as they arrived at the airlock hatchway
that would let them out on the planet surface.

they looked at each other in puzzlement.
its the computer, explained zaphod. i discovered it had an emergency

back-up personality that i thought might work out better.now this is going to be your rst day out on a strange new planet,
continued eddies new voice, so i want you all wrapped up snug and warm,
and no playing with any naughty bug-eyed monsters.

zaphod tapped impatiently on the hatch.
im sorry, he said, i think we might be better o with a slide rule.
right! snapped the computer. who said that?
will you open the exit hatch please, computer? said zaphod trying not

to get angry.

not until whoever said that owns up, urged the computer, stamping a

few synapses closed.

oh god, muttered ford, slumped against a bulkhead and started to
count to ten. he was desperately worried that one day sentinent life forms
would forget how to do this. only by counting could humans demonstrate
their independence of computers.

come on, said eddie sternly.
computer . . .  began zaphod . . .
im waiting, interrupted eddie. i can wait all day if necessary . . . 
computer . . .  said zaphod again, who had been trying to think of some
subtle piece of reasoning to put the computer down with, and had decided
not to bother competing with it on its own ground, if you dont open that
exit hatch this moment i shall zap straight o to your major data banks and
reprogram you with a very large axe, got that?
eddie, shocked, paused and considered this.
ford carried on counting quietly. this is about the most aggressive thing
you can do to a computer, the equivalent of going up to a human being and
saying blood . . . blood . . . blood . . . blood . . .

finally eddie said quietly, i can see this relationship is something were

all going to have to work at, and the hatchway opened.

an icy wind ripped into them, they hugged themselves warmly and stepped

down the ramp on to the barren dust of magrathea.

itll all end in tears, i know it, shouted eddie after them and closed

the hatchway again.

a few minutes later he opened and closed the hatchway again in response

to a command that caught him entirely by surprise.

five gures wandered slowly over the blighted land. bits of it were dullish
grey, bits of it dullish brown, the rest of it rather less interesting to look at.
it was like a dried-out marsh, now barren of all vegetation and covered with
a layer of dust about an inch thick. it was very cold.

zaphod was clearly rather depressed about it. he stalked o by himself

and was soon lost to sight behind a slight rise in the ground.

the wind stung arthurs eyes and ears, and the stale thin air clasped his

throat. however, the thing stung most was his mind.

its fantastic . . .  he said, and his own voice rattled his ears. sound

carried badly in this thin atmosphere.

desolate hole if you ask me, said ford. i could have more fun in a
cat litter. he felt a mounting irritation. of all the planets in all the star
systems of all the galaxy  didnt he just have to turn up at a dump like
this after fteen years of being a castaway? not even a hot dog stand in
evidence. he stooped down and picked up a cold clot of earth, but there was
nothing underneath it worth crossing thousands of light years to look at.

no, insisted arthur, dont you understand, this is the rst time ive
actually stood on the surface of another planet . . . a whole alien world . . . !
pity its such a dump though.

trillian hugged herself, shivered and frowned. she could have sworn she
saw a slight and unexpected movement out of the corner of her eye, but when
she glanced in that direction all she could see was the ship, still and silent, a
hundred yards or so behind them.

she was relieved when a second or so later they caught sight of zaphod
standing on top of the ridge of ground and waving to them to come and join
him.

he seemed to be excited, but they couldnt clearly hear what he was

saying because of the thinnish atmosphere and the wind.

as they approached the ridge of higher ground they became aware that
it seemed to be circular  a crater about a hundred and fty yards wide.round the outside of the crater the sloping ground was spattered with black
and red lumps. they stopped and looked at a piece.
it was
rubbery.

it was wet.

with horror they suddenly realized that it was fresh whalemeat.
at the top of the craters lip they met zaphod.
look, he said, pointing into the crater.
in the centre lay the exploded carcass of a lonely sperm whale that hadnt
lived long enough to be disappointed with its lot. the silence was only
disturbed by the slight involuntary spasms of trillians throat.

i suppose theres no point in trying to bury it? murmured arthur, and

then wished he hadnt.

come, said zaphod and started back down into the crater.
what, down there? said trillian with severe distaste.
yeah, said zaphod, come on, ive got something to show you.
we can see it, said trillian.
not that, said zaphod, something else. come on.
they all hesitated.
come on, insisted zaphod, ive found a way in.
in? said arthur in horror.
into the interior of the planet! an underground passage. the force of
the whales impact cracked it open, and thats where we have to go. where
no man has trod these ve million years, into the very depths of time itself
. . . 

marvin started his ironical humming again.
zaphod hit him and he shut up.
with little shudders of disgust they all followed zaphod down the incline

into the crater, trying very hard not to look at its unfortunate creator.

life, said marvin dolefully, loathe it or ignore it, you cant like it.
the ground had caved in where the whale had hit it revealing a network
of galleries and passages, now largely obstructed by collapsed rubble and
entrails. zaphod had made a start clearing a way into one of them, but
marvin was able to do it rather faster. dank air wafted out of its dark
recesses, and as zaphod shone a torch into it, little was visible in the dusty
gloom.

according to the legends, he said, the magratheans lived most of their

lives underground.

whys that? said arthur. did the surface become too polluted or

overpopulated?

no, i dont think so, said zaphod. i think they just didnt like it very

much.are you sure you know what youre doing? said trillian peering ner-

vously into the darkness. weve been attacked once already you know.

look kid, i promise you the live population of this planet is nil plus the

four of us, so come on, lets get on in there. er, hey earthman . . . 

arthur, said arthur.
yeah could you just sort of keep this robot with you and guard this end

of the passageway. okay?

guard? said arthur. what from? you just said theres no one here.
yeah, well, just for safety, okay? said zaphod.
whose? yours or mine?
good lad. okay, here we go.
zaphod scrambled down into the passage, followed by trillian and ford.
well i hope you all have a really miserable time, complained arthur.
dont worry, marvin assured him, they will.
in a few seconds they had disappeared from view.
arthur stamped around in a hu, and then decided that a whales grave-

yard is not on the whole a good place to stamp around in.

marvin eyed him balefully for a moment, and then turned himself o.

* * *

zaphod marched quickly down the passageway, nervous as hell, but trying
to hide it by striding purposefully. he ung the torch beam around. the
walls were covered in dark tiles and were cold to the touch, the air thick with
decay.

there, what did i tell you? he said. an inhabited planet. magrathea,

and he strode on through the dirt and debris that littered the tile oor.

trillian was reminded unavoidably of the london underground, though

it was less thoroughly squalid.

at intervals along the walls the tiles gave way to large mosaics  simple
angular patterns in bright colours. trillian stopped and studied one of them
but could not interpret any sense in them. she called to zaphod.

hey, have you any idea what these strange symbols are?
i think theyre just strange symbols of some kind, said zaphod, hardly

glancing back.

trillian shrugged and hurried after him.
from time to time a doorway led either to the left or right into smallish
chambers which ford discovered to be full of derelict computer equipment.
he dragged zaphod into one to have a look. trillian followed.

look, said ford, you reckon this is magrathea . . . 
yeah, said zaphod, and we heard the voice, right?okay, so ive bought the fact that its magrathea  for the moment.
what you have so far said nothing about is how in the galaxy you found it.
you didnt just look it up in a star atlas, thats for sure.

research. government archives. detective work. few lucky guesses.

easy.

and then you stole the heart of gold to come and look for it with?
i stole it to look for a lot of things.
a lot of things? said ford in surprise. like what?
i dont know.
what?
i dont know what im looking for.
why not?
because . . . because . . . i think it might be because if i knew i wouldnt

be able to look for them.

what, are you crazy?
its a possibility i havent ruled out yet, said zaphod quietly. i only
know as much about myself as my mind can work out under its current
conditions. and its current conditions are not good.

for a long time nobody said anything as ford gazed at zaphod with a

mind suddenly full of worry.

listen old friend, if you want to . . .  started ford eventually.
no, wait . . . ill tell you something, said zaphod. i freewheel a lot. i
get an idea to do something, and, hey, why not, i do it. i reckon ill become
president of the galaxy, and it just happens, its easy.
i decide to steal
this ship. i decide to look for magrathea, and it all just happens. yeah, i
work out how it can best be done, right, but it always works out. its like
having a galacticredit card which keeps on working though you never send
o the cheques. and then whenever i stop and think why did i want to do
something?  how did i work out how to do it?  i get a very strong desire
just to stop thinking about it. like i have now. its a big eort to talk about
it.

zaphod paused for a while. for a while there was silence. then he
frowned and said, last night i was worrying about this again. about the
fact that part of my mind just didnt seem to work properly. then it occurred
to me that the way it seemed was that someone else was using my mind to
have good ideas with, without telling me about it.
i put the two ideas
together and decided that maybe that somebody had locked o part of my
mind for that purpose, which was why i couldnt use it. i wondered if there
was a way i could check.

i went to the ships medical bay and plugged myself into the encephelo-
graphic screen. i went through every major screening test on both my heads all the tests i had to go through under government medical ocers before
my nomination for presidency could be properly ratied. they showed up
nothing. nothing unexpected at least. they showed that i was clever, imag-
inative, irresponsible, untrustworthy, extrovert, nothing you couldnt have
guessed. and no other anomalies. so i started inventing further tests, com-
pletely at random. nothing. then i tried superimposing the results from one
head on top of the results from the other head. still nothing. finally i got
silly, because id given it all up as nothing more than an attack of paranoia.
last thing i did before i packed it in was take the superimposed picture and
look at it through a green lter. you remember i was always superstitious
about the color green when i was a kid? i always wanted to be a pilot on
one of the trading scouts?

ford nodded.
and there it was, said zaphod, clear as day. a whole section in the
middle of both brains that related only to each other and not to anything
else around them. some bastard had cauterized all the synapses and elec-
tronically traumatised those two lumps of cerebellum.

ford stared at him, aghast. trillian had turned white.
somebody did that to you? whispered ford.
yeah.
but have you any idea who? or why?
why? i can only guess. but i do know who the bastard was.
you know? how do you know?
because they left their initials burnt into the cauterized synapses. they

left them there for me to see.

ford stared at him in horror and felt his skin begin to crawl.
initials? burnt into your brain?
yeah.
well, what were they, for gods sake?
zaphod looked at him in silence again for a moment. then he looked

away.

z.b., he said. at that moment a steel shutter slammed down behind

them and gas started to pour into the chamber.

ill tell you about it later, choked zaphod as all three passed out.

on the surface of magrathea arthur wandered about moodily.

ford had thoughtfully left him his copy of the hitchhikers guide to the

galaxy to while away the time with. he pushed a few buttons at random.

the hitchhikers guide to the galaxy is a very unevenly edited book and
contains many passages that simply seemed to its editors like a good idea at
the time.

one of these (the one arthur now came across) supposedly relates the
experiences of one veet voojagig, a quiet young student at the university
of maximegalon, who pursued a brilliant academic career studying ancient
philology, transformational ethics and the wave harmonic theory of historical
perception, and then, after a night of drinking pan galactic gargle blasters
with zaphod beeblebrox, became increasingly obsessed with the problem of
what had happened to all the biros hed bought over the past few years.

there followed a long period of painstaking research during which he vis-
ited all the major centres of biro loss throughout the galaxy and eventually
came up with a quaint little theory which quite caught the public imagination
at the time. somewhere in the cosmos, he said, along with all the planets
inhabited by humanoids, reptiloids, shoids, walking treeoids and superintel-
ligent shades of the colour blue, there was also a planet entirely given over to
biro life forms. and it was to this planet that unattended biros would make
their way, slipping away quietly through wormholes in space to a world where
they knew they could enjoy a uniquely biroid lifestyle, responding to highly
biro-oriented stimuli, and generally leading the biro equivalent of the good
life.

and as theories go this was all very ne and pleasant until veet voojagig
suddenly claimed to have found this planet, and to have worked there for a
while driving a limousine for a family of cheap green retractables, whereupon
he was taken away, locked up, wrote a book, and was nally sent into tax
exile, which is the usual fate reserved for those who are determined to make
a fool of themselves in public.when one day an expedition was sent to the spatial coordinates that voo-
jagig had claimed for this planet they discovered only a small asteroid in-
habited by a solitary old man who claimed repeatedly that nothing was true,
though he was later discovered to be lying.

there did, however, remain the question of both the mysterious 60,000
altairan dollars paid yearly into his brantisvogan bank account, and of course
zaphod beeblebroxs highly protable second-hand biro business.

* * *

arthur read this, and put the book down.
the robot still sat there, completely inert.
arthur got up and walked to the top of the crater. he walked around the

crater. he watched two suns set magnicently over magrathea.

he went back down into the crater. he woke the robot up because even

a manically depressed robot is better to talk to than nobody.

nights falling, he said. look robot, the stars are coming out.
from the heart of a dark nebula it is possible to see very few stars, and

only very faintly, but they were there to be seen.

the robot obediently looked at them, then looked back.
i know, he said. wretched isnt it?
but that sunset! ive never seen anything like it in my wildest dreams

. . . the two suns! it was like mountains of re boiling into space.

ive seen it, said marvin. its rubbish.
we only ever had the one sun at home, persevered arthur, i came

from a planet called earth you know.

i know, said marvin, you keep going on about it. it sounds awful.
ah no, it was a beautiful place.
did it have oceans?
oh yes, said arthur with a sigh, great wide rolling blue oceans . . . 
cant bear oceans, said marvin.
tell me, inquired arthur, do you get on well with other robots?
hate them, said marvin. where are you going?
arthur couldnt bear any more. he had got up again.
i think ill ju st take another walk, he said.
dont blame you, said marvin and counted ve hundred and ninety-

seven thousand million sheep before falling asleep again a second later.

arthur slapped his arms about himself to try and get his circulation a
little more enthusiastic about its job. he trudged back up the wall of the
crater.because the atmosphere was so thin and because there was no moon,
nightfall was very rapid and it was by now very dark. because of this,
arthur practically walked into the old man before he noticed him.

he was standing with his back to arthur watching the very last glimmers
of light sink into blackness behind the horizon. he was tallish, elderly and
dressed in a single long grey robe. when he turned his face was thin and
distinguished, careworn but not unkind, the sort of face you would happily
bank with. but he didnt turn yet, not even to react to arthurs yelp of
surprise.

eventually the last rays of the sun had vanished completely, and he
turned. his face was still illuminated from somewhere, and when arthur
looked for the source of the light he saw that a few yards away stood a small
craft of some kind  a small hovercraft, arthur guessed. it shed a dim pool
of light around it.

the man looked at arthur, sadly it seemed.
you choose a cold night to visit our dead planet, he said.
who . . . who are you? stammered arthur.
the man looked away. again a kind of sadness seemed to cross his face.
my name is not important, he said.
he seemed to have something on his mind. conversation was clearly

something he felt he didnt have to rush at. arthur felt awkward.

i . . . er . . . you startled me . . .  he said, lamely.
the man looked round to him again and slightly raised his eyebrows.
hmmmm? he said.
i said you startled me.
do not be alarmed, i will not harm you.
arthur frowned at him. but you shot at us! there were missiles . . . 

he said.

the man gazed into the pit of the crater. the slight glow from marvins

eyes cast very faint red shadows on the huge carcass of the whale.

the man chuckled slightly.an automatic system, he said and gave a small sigh. ancient comput-
ers ranged in the bowels of the planet tick away the dark millennia, and the
ages hang heavy on their dusty data banks. i think they take the occasional
pot shot to relieve the monotony.

he looked gravely at arthur and said, im a great fan of science you

know.

oh . . . er, really? said arthur, who was beginning to nd the mans

curious, kindly manner disconcerting.

oh, yes, said the old man, and simply stopped talking again.
ah, said arthur, er . . .  he had an odd felling of being like a man in
the act of adultery who is surprised when the womans husband wanders into
the room, changes his trousers, passes a few idle remarks about the weather
and leaves again.

you seem ill at ease, said the old man with polite concern.
er, no . . . well, yes. actually you see, we werent really expecting to nd
anybody about in fact. i sort of gathered that you were all dead or something
. . . 

dead? said the old man. good gracious no, we have but slept.
slept? said arthur incredulously.
yes, through the economic recession you see, said the old man, appar-
ently unconcerned about whether arthur understood a word he was talking
about or not.

arthur had to prompt him again.
er, economic recession?
well you see, ve million years ago the galactic economy collapsed, and
seeing that custom-made planets are something of a luxury commodity you
see . . . 

he paused and looked at arthur.
you know we built planets do you? he asked solemnly.
well yes, said arthur, id sort of gathered . . . 
fascinating trade, said the old man, and a wistful look came into his
eyes, doing the coastlines was always my favourite. used to have endless fun
doing the little bits in fjords . . . so anyway, he said trying to nd his thread
again, the recession came and we decided it would save us a lot of bother
if we just slept through it. so we programmed the computers to revive us
when it was all over.

the man stied a very slight yawn and continued.
the computers were index linked to the galactic stock market prices you
see, so that wed all be revived when everybody else had rebuilt the economy
enough to aord our rather expensive services.

arthur, a regular guardian reader, was deeply shocked at this.thats a pretty unpleasant way to behave isnt it?
is it? asked the old man mildly. im sorry, im a bit out of touch.
he pointed down into the crater.
is that robot yours? he said.
no, came a thin metallic voice from the crater, im mine.
if youd call it a robot, muttered arthur. its more a sort of electronic

sulking machine.

bring it, said the old man. arthur was quite surprised to hear a note
of decision suddenly present in the old mans voice. he called to marvin who
crawled up the slope making a big show of being lame, which he wasnt.

on second thoughts, said the old man, leave it here. you must come
with me. great things are afoot. he turned towards his craft which, though
no apparent signal had been given, now drifted quietly towards them through
the dark.

arthur looked down at marvin, who now made an equally big show of
turning round laboriously and trudging o down into the crater again mut-
tering sour nothings to himself.

come, called the old man, come now or you will be late.
late? said arthur. what for?
what is your name, human?
dent. arthur dent, said arthur.
late, as in the late dentarthurdent, said the old man, sternly. its
a sort of threat you see. another wistful look came into his tired old eyes.
ive never been very good at them myself, but im told they can be very
eective.

arthur blinked at him.
what an extraordinary person, he muttered to himself.
i beg your pardon? said the old man.
oh nothing, im sorry, said arthur in embarrassment. all right, where

do we go?

in my aircar, said the old man motioning arthur to get into the craft
which had settled silently next to them. we are going deep into the bowels
of the planet where even now our race is being revived from its ve-million-
year slumber. magrathea awakes.

arthur shivered involuntarily as he seated himself next to the old man.
the strangeness of it, the silent bobbing movement of the craft as it soared
into the night sky quite unsettled him.

he looked at the old man, his face illuminated by the dull glow of tiny

lights on the instrument panel.

excuse me, he said to him, what is your name by the way?my name? said the old man, and the same distant sadness came into

his face again. he paused. my name, he said, . . . is slartibartfast.

arthur practically choked.
i beg your pardon? he spluttered.
slartibartfast, repeated the old man quietly.
slartibartfast?
the old man looked at him gravely.
i said it wasnt important, he said.
the aircar sailed through the night.

it is an important and popular fact that things are not always what they
seem. for instance, on the planet earth, man had always assumed that
he was more intelligent than dolphins because he had achieved so much 
the wheel, new york, wars and so on  whilst all the dolphins had ever
done was muck about in the water having a good time. but conversely, the
dolphins had always believed that they were far more intelligent than man 
for precisely the same reasons.

curiously enough, the dolphins had long known of the impending destruc-
tion of the planet earth and had made many attempts to alert mankind of
the danger; but most of their communications were misinterpreted as amus-
ing attempts to punch footballs or whistle for tidbits, so they eventually gave
up and left the earth by their own means shortly before the vogons arrived.
the last ever dolphin message was misinterpreted as a surprisingly sophis-
ticated attempt to do a double-backwardssomersault through a hoop whilst
whistling the star sprangled banner, but in fact the message was this: so
long and thanks for all the sh.

in fact there was only one species on the planet more intelligent than
dolphins, and they spent a lot of their time in behavioural research labo-
ratories running round inside wheels and conducting frighteningly elegant
and subtle experiments on man. the fact that once again man completely
misinterpreted this relationship was entirely according to these creatures
plans.

silently the aircar coasted through the cold darkness, a single soft glow of
light that was utterly alone in the deep magrathean night. it sped swiftly.
arthurs companion seemed sunk in his own thoughts, and when arthur tried
on a couple of occasions to engage him in conversation again he would simply
reply by asking if he was comfortable enough, and then left it at that.

arthur tried to gauge the speed at which they were travelling, but the
blackness outside was absolute and he was denied any reference points. the
sense of motion was so soft and slight he could almost believe they were
hardly moving at all.

then a tiny glow of light appeared in the far distance and within seconds
had grown so much in size that arthur realized it was travelling towards them
at a colossal speed, and he tried to make out what sort of craft it might be.
he peered at it, but was unable to discern any clear shape, and suddenly
gasped in alarm as the aircraft dipped sharply and headed downwards in
what seemed certain to be a collision course. their relative velocity seemed
unbelievable, and arthur had hardly time to draw breath before it was all
over. the next thing he was aware of was an insane silver blur that seemed
to surround him. he twisted his head sharply round and saw a small black
point dwindling rapidly in the distance behind them, and it took him several
seconds to realize what had happened.

they had plunged into a tunnel in the ground. the colossal speed had
been their own relative to the glow of light which was a stationary hole in the
ground, the mouth of the tunnel. the insane blur of silver was the circular
wall of the tunnel down which they were shooting, apparently at several
hundred miles an hour.

he closed his eyes in terror.
after a length of time which he made no attempt to judge, he sensed a
slight subsidence in their speed and some while later became aware that they
were gradually gliding to a gentle halt.

he opened his eyes again. they were still in the silver tunnel, threadingand weaving their way through what appeared to be a crisscross warren of
converging tunnels. when they nally stopped it was in a small chamber of
curved steel. several tunnels also had their terminus here, and at the farther
end of the chamber arthur could see a large circle of dim irritating light.
it was irritating because it played tricks with the eyes, it was impossible to
focus on it properly or tell how near or far it was. arthur guessed (quite
wrongly) that it might be ultra violet.

slartibartfast turned and regarded arthur with his solemn old eyes.
earthman, he said, we are now deep in the heart of magrathea.
how did you know i was an earthman? demanded arthur.
these things will become clear to you, said the old man gently, at
least, he added with slight doubt in his voice, clearer than they are at the
moment.

he continued: i should warn you that the chamber we are about to pass
into does not literally exist within our planet. it is a little too . . . large. we
are about to pass through a gateway into a vast tract of hyperspace. it may
disturb you.

arthur made nervous noises.
slartibartfast touched a button and added, not entirely reassuringly. it

scares the willies out of me. hold tight.

the car shot forward straight into the circle of light, and suddenly arthur

had a fairly clear idea of what innity looked like.

it wasnt innity in fact. innity itself looks at and uninteresting. look-
ing up into the night sky is looking into innity  distance is incomprehensible
and therefore meaningless. the chamber into which the aircar emerged was
anything but innite, it was just very very big, so that it gave the impression
of innity far better than innity itself.

arthurs senses bobbed and span, as, travelling at the immense speed
he knew the aircar attained, they climbed slowly through the open air leav-
ing the gateway through which they had passed an invisible pinprick in the
shimmering wall behind them.

the wall.
the wall deed the imagination  seduced it and defeated it. the wall
was so paralysingly vast and sheer that its top, bottom and sides passed away
beyond the reach of sight. the mere shock of vertigo could kill a man.

the wall appeared perfectly at. it would take the nest laser measuring
equipment to detect that as it climbed, apparently to innity, as it dropped
dizzily away, as it planed out to either side, it also curved. it met itself again
in other words the wall formed the inside of
thirteen light seconds away.a hollow sphere, a sphere over three million miles across and ooded with
unimaginable light.

welcome, said slartibartfast as the tiny speck that was the aircar, trav-
elling now at three times the speed of sound, crept imperceptibly forward into
the mindboggling space, welcome, he said, to our factory oor.

arthur stared about him in a kind of wonderful horror. ranged away
before them, at distances he could neither judge nor even guess at, were a
series of curious suspensions, delicate traceries of metal and light hung about
shadowy spherical shapes that hung in the space.

this, said slartibartfast, is where we make most of our planets you

see.

you mean, said arthur, trying to form the words, you mean youre

starting it all up again now?

no no, good heavens no, exclaimed the old man, no, the galaxy isnt
nearly rich enough to support us yet. no, weve been awakened to perform
just one extraordinary commission for very . . . special clients from another
dimension. it may interest you . . . there in the distance in front of us.

arthur followed the old mans nger, till he was able to pick out the
oating structure he was pointing out.
it was indeed the only one of the
many structures that betrayed any sign of activity about it, though this was
more a sublimal impression than anything one could put ones nger on.

at the moment however a ash of light arced through the structure and
revealed in stark relief the patterns that were formed on the dark sphere
within. patterns that arthur knew, rough blobby shapes that were as familiar
to him as the shapes of words, part of the furniture of his mind. for a few
seconds he sat in stunned silence as the images rushed around his mind and
tried to nd somewhere to settle down and make sense.

part of his brain told him that he knew perfectly well what he was looking
at and what the shapes represented whilst another quite sensibly refused to
countenance the idea and abdicated responsibility for any further thinking
in that direction.

the ash came again, and this time there could be no doubt.
the earth . . .  whispered arthur.
well, the earth mark two in fact, said slartibartfast cheerfully. were

making a copy from our original blueprints.

there was a pause.
are you trying to tell me, said arthur, slowly and with control, that

you originally . . . made the earth?

oh yes, said slartibartfast. did you ever go to a place . . . i think it

was called norway?

no, said arthur, no, i didnt.pity, said slartibartfast, that was one of mine. won an award you
know. lovely crinkly edges. i was most upset to hear about its destruction.

you were upset!
yes. five minutes later and it wouldnt have mattered so much. it was

a quite shocking cock-up.

huh? said arthur.
the mice were furious.
the mice were furious?
oh yes, said the old man mildly.
yes well so i expect were the dogs and cats and duckbilled platypuses,

but . . . 

ah, but they hadnt paid for it you see, had they?
look, said arthur, would it save you a lot of time if i just gave up

and went mad now?

for a while the aircar ew on in awkward silence. then the old man tried

patiently to explain.

earthman, the planet you lived on was commissioned, paid for, and run
by mice. it was destroyed ve minutes before the completion of the purpose
for which it was built, and weve got to build another one.

only one word registered with arthur.
mice? he said.
indeed earthman.
look, sorry  are we talking about the little white furry things with the
cheese xation and women standing on tables screaming in early sixties sit
coms?

slartibartfast coughed politely.
earthman, he said, it is sometimes hard to follow your mode of speech.
remember i have been asleep inside this planet of magrathea for ve million
years and know little of these early sixties sit coms of which you speak. these
creatures you call mice, you see, they are not quite as they appear. they are
merely the protrusion into our dimension of vast hyperintelligent pandimen-
sional beings. the whole business with the cheese and the squeaking is just
a front.

the old man paused, and with a sympathetic frown continued. theyve

been experimenting on you im afraid.

arthur thought about this for a second, and then his face cleared.
ah no, he said, i see the source of the misunderstanding now. no,
look you see, what happened was that we used to do experiments on them.
they were often used in behavioural research, pavlov and all that sort of
stu. so what happened was hat the mice would be set all sorts of tests,
learning to ring bells, run around mazes and things so that the whole natureof the learning process could be examined. from our observations of their
behaviour we were able to learn all sorts of things about our own . . . 

arthurs voice tailed o.
such subtlety . . .  said slartibartfast, one has to admire it.
what? said arthur.
how better to disguise their real natures, and how better to guide your
thinking. suddenly running down a maze the wrong way, eating the wrong
bit of cheese, unexpectedly dropping dead of myxomatosis,  if its nely
calculated the cumulative eect is enormous.

he paused for eect.
you see, earthman, they really are particularly clever hyperintelligent
pan-dimensional beings. your planet and people have formed the matrix of
an organic computer running a tenmillion-year research programme . . . let
me tell you the whole story. itll take a little time.

time, said arthur weakly, is not currently one of my problems.

there are of course many problems connected with life, of which some of the
most popular are why are people born? why do they die? why do they want
to spend so much of the intervening time wearing digital watches?

many many millions of years ago a race of hyperintelligent pandimensional
beings (whose physical manifestation in their own pan-dimensional universe
is not dissimilar to our own) got so fed up with the constant bickering about
the meaning of life which used to interrupt their favourite pastime of brockian
ultra cricket (a curious game which involved suddenly hitting people for no
readily apparent reason and then running away) that they decided to sit
down and solve their problems once and for all.

and to this end they built themselves a stupendous super computer which
was so amazingly intelligent that even before the data banks had been con-
nected up it had started from i think therefore i am and got as far as the
existence of rice pudding and income tax before anyone managed to turn it
o.

it was the size of a small city.
its main console was installed in a specially designed executive oce,
mounted on an enormous executive desk of nest ultramahagony topped
with rich ultrared leather. the dark carpeting was discreetly sumptuous,
exotic pot plants and tastefully engraved prints of the principal computer
programmers and their families were deployed liberally about the room, and
stately windows looked out upon a tree-lined public square.

on the day of the great on-turning two soberly dressed programmers
with brief cases arrived and were shown discreetly into the oce. they were
aware that this day they would represent their entire race in its greatest
moment, but they conducted themselves calmly and quietly as they seated
themselves deferentially before the desk, opened their brief cases and took
out their leather-bound notebooks.

their names were lunkwill and fook.
for a few moments they sat in respectful silence, then, after exchanginga quiet glance with fook, lunkwill leaned forward and touched a small black
panel.

the subtlest of hums indicated that the massive computer was now in
total active mode. after a pause it spoke to them in a voice rich resonant
and deep.

it said: what is this great task for which i, deep thought, the second
greatest computer in the universe of time and space have been called into
existence?

lunkwill and fook glanced at each other in surprise.
your task, o computer . . .  began fook.
no, wait a minute, this isnt right, said lunkwill, worried. we dis-
tinctly designed this computer to be the greatest one ever and were not
making do with second best. deep thought, he addressed the computer,
are you not as we designed you to be, the greatest most powerful computer
in all time?

i described myself as the second greatest, intoned deep thought, and

such i am.

another worried look passed between the two programmers. lunkwill

cleared his throat.

there must be some mistake, he said, are you not a greatest computer
than the milliard gargantubrain which can count all the atoms in a star in
a millisecond?

the milliard gargantubrain? said deep thought with unconcealed con-

tempt. a mere abacus  mention it not.

and are you not, said fook leaning anxiously forward, a greater an-
alyst than the googleplex star thinker in the seventh galaxy of light and
ingenuity which can calculate the trajectory of every single dust particle
throughout a ve-week dangrabad beta sand blizzard?

a ve-week sand blizzard? said deep thought haughtily. you ask this
of me who have contemplated the very vectors of the atoms in the big bang
itself? molest me not with this pocket calculator stu.

the two programmers sat in uncomfortable silence for a moment. then

lunkwill leaned forward again.

but are you not, he said, a more endish disputant than the great
hyperlobic omni-cognate neutron wrangler of ciceronicus 12, the magic
and indefatigable?

the great hyperlobic omni-cognate neutron wrangler, said deep
thought thoroughly rolling the r s, could talk all four legs o an arcturan
megadonkey  but only i could persuade it to go for a walk afterwards.

then what, asked fook, is the problem?there is no problem, said deep thought with magnicent ringing tones.
i am simply the second greatest computer in the universe of space and
time.

but the second ? insisted lunkwill. why do you keep saying the sec-
ond? youre surely not thinking of the multicorticoid perspicutron titan
muller are you? or the pondermatic? or the . . . 

contemptuous lights ashed across the computers console.
i spare not a single unit of thought on these cybernetic simpletons! he

boomed. i speak of none but the computer that is to come after me!

fook was losing patience. he pushed his notebook aside and muttered,

i think this is getting needlessly messianic.

you know nothing of future time, pronounced deep thought, and yet
in my teeming circuitry i can navigate the innite delta streams of future
probability and see that there must one day come a computer whose merest
operational parameters i am not worthy to calculate, but which it will be my
fate eventually to design.

fook sighed heavily and glanced across to lunkwill.
can we get on and ask the question? he said.
lunkwill motioned him to wait.
what computer is this of which you speak? he asked.
i will speak of it no further in this present time, said deep thought.

now. ask what else of me you will that i may function. speak.

they shrugged at each other. fook composed himself.
o deep thought computer, he said, the task we have designed you
to perform is this. we want you to tell us . . .  he paused, . . . the answer!

the answer? said deep thought. the answer to what?
life! urged fook.
the universe! said lunkwill.
everything! they said in chorus.
deep thought paused for a moments reection.
tricky, he said nally.
but can you do it?
again, a signicant pause.
yes, said deep thought, i can do it.
there is an answer? said fook with breathless excitement.
a simple answer? added lunkwill.
yes, said deep thought. life, the universe, and everything. there

is an answer. but, he added, ill have to think about it.

a sudden commotion destroyed the moment: the door ew open and two
angry men wearing the coarse faded-blue robes and belts of the cruxwanuniversity burst into the room, thrusting aside the ineectual unkies who
tried to bar their way.

we demand admission! shouted the younger of the two men elbowing

a pretty young secretary in the throat.

come on, shouted the older one, you cant keep us out! he pushed a

junior programmer back through the door.

we demand that you cant keep us out! bawled the younger one, though
he was now rmly inside the room and no further attempts were being made
to stop him.

who are you? said lunkwill, rising angrily from his seat. what do

you want?

i am majikthise! announced the older one.
and i demand that i am vroomfondel! shouted the younger one.
majikthise turned on vroomfondel. its alright, he explained angrily,

you dont need to demand that.

all right! bawled vroomfondel banging on an nearby desk. i am
vroomfondel, and that is not a demand, that is a solid fact! what we
demand is solid facts!

no we dont! exclaimed majikthise in irritation. that is precisely

what we dont demand!

scarcely pausing for breath, vroomfondel shouted, we dont demand
solid facts! what we demand is a total absence of solid facts. i demand that
i may or may not be vroomfondel!

but who the devil are you? exclaimed an outraged fook.
we, said majikthise, are philosophers.
though we may not be, said vroomfondel waving a warning nger at

the programmers.

yes we are, insisted majikthise. we are quite denitely here as rep-
resentatives of the amalgamated union of philosophers, sages, luminaries
and other thinking persons, and we want this machine o, and we want it
o now !

whats the problem? said lunkwill.
ill tell you what the problem is mate, said majikthise, demarcation,

thats the problem!

we demand, yelled vroomfondel, that demarcation may or may not

be the problem!

you just let the machines get on with the adding up, warned majikthise,
and well take care of the eternal verities thank you very much. you want
to check your legal position you do mate. under law the quest for ultimate
truth is quite clearly the inalienable prerogative of your working thinkers.
any bloody machine goes and actually nds it and were straight out of ajob arent we? i mean whats the use of our sitting up half the night arguing
that there may or may not be a god if this machine only goes and gives us
his bleeding phone number the next morning?

thats right! shouted vroomfondel, we demand rigidly dened areas

of doubt and uncertainty!

suddenly a stentorian voice boomed across the room.
might i make an observation at this point? inquired deep thought.
well go on strike! yelled vroomfondel.
thats right! agreed majikthise. youll have a national philosophers

strike on your hands!

the hum level in the room suddenly increased as several ancillary bass
driver units, mounted in sedately carved and varnished cabinet speakers
around the room, cut in to give deep thoughts voice a little more power.

all i wanted to say, bellowed the computer, is that my circuits are now
irrevocably committed to calculating the answer to the ultimate question of
life, the universe, and everything  he paused and satised himself that
he now had everyones attention, before continuing more quietly, but the
programme will take me a little while to run.

fook glanced impatiently at his watch.
how long? he said.
seven and a half million years, said deep thought.
lunkwill and fook blinked at each other.
seven and a half million years . . . ! they cried in chorus.
yes, declaimed deep thought, i said id have to think about it, didnt
i? and it occurs to me that running a programme like this is bound to create
an enormous amount of popular publicity for the whole area of philosophy
in general. everyones going to have their own theories about what answer
im eventually to come up with, and who better to capitalize on that media
market than you yourself? so long as you can keep disagreeing with each
other violently enough and slagging each other o in the popular press, you
can keep yourself on the gravy train for life. how does that sound?

the two philosophers gaped at him.
bloody hell, said majikthise, now that is what i call thinking. here

vroomfondel, why do we never think of things like that?

dunno, said vroomfondel in an awed whisper, think our brains must

be too highly trained majikthise.

so saying, they turned on their heels and walked out of the door and into

a lifestyle beyond their wildest dreams.

yes, very salutary, said arthur, after slartibartfast had related the salient
points of the story to him, but i dont understand what all this has got to
do with the earth and mice and things.

that is but the rst half of the story earthman, said the old man. if
you would care to discover what happened seven and a half millions later,
on the great day of the answer, allow me to invite you to my study where
you can experience the events yourself on our sens-o-tape records. that
is unless you would care to take a quick stroll on the surface of new earth.
its only half completed im afraid  we havent even nished burying the
articial dinosaur skeletons in the crust yet, then we have the tertiary and
quarternary periods of the cenozoic era to lay down, and . . . 

no thank you, said arthur, it wouldnt be quite the same.
no, said slartibartfast, it wont be, and he turned the aircar round

and headed back towards the mind-numbing wall.

slartibartfasts study was a total mess, like the results of an explosion in a
public library. the old man frowned as they stepped in.

terribly unfortunate, he said, a diode blew in one of the life-support
computers. when we tried to revive our cleaning sta we discovered theyd
been dead for nearly thirty thousand years. whos going to clear away the
bodies, thats what i want to know. look why dont you sit yourself down
over there and let me plug you in?

he gestured arthur towards a chair which looked as if it had been made

out of the rib cage of a stegosaurus.

it was made out of the rib cage of a stegosaurus, explained the old man
as he pottered about shing bits of wire out from under tottering piles of
paper and drawing instruments. here, he said, hold these, and passed a
couple of stripped wire end to arthur.

the instant he took hold of them a bird ew straight through him.
he was suspended in mid-air and totally invisible to himself. beneath him
was a pretty treelined city square, and all around it as far as the eye could see
were white concrete buildings of airy spacious design but somewhat the worse
for wear  many were cracked and stained with rain. today however the sun
was shining, a fresh breeze danced lightly through the trees, and the odd
sensation that all the buildings were quietly humming was probably caused
by the fact that the square and all the streets around it were thronged with
cheerful excited people. somewhere a band was playing, brightly coloured
ags were uttering in the breeze and the spirit of carnival was in the air.

arthur felt extraordinarily lonely stuck up in the air above it all without
so much as a body to his name, but before he had time to reect on this a
voice rang out across the square and called for everyones attention.

a man standing on a brightly dressed dais before the building which

clearly dominated the square was addressing the crowd over a tannoy.

o people waiting in the shadow of deep thought! he cried out. hon-
oured descendants of vroomfondel and majikthise, the greatest and mosttruly interesting pundits the universe has ever known . . . the time of wait-
ing is over!

wild cheers broke out amongst the crowd. flags, streamers and wolf
whistles sailed through the air. the narrower streets looked rather like cen-
tipedes rolled over on their backs and frantically waving their legs in the
air.

seven and a half million years our race has waited for this great and
hopefully enlightening day! cried the cheer leader. the day of the an-
swer!

hurrahs burst from the ecstatic crowd.
never again, cried the man, never again will we wake up in the morning
and think who am i? what is my purpose in life? does it really, cosmically
speaking, matter if i dont get up and go to work? for today we will nally
learn once and for all the plain and simple answer to all these nagging little
problems of life, the universe and everything!

as the crowd erupted once again, arthur found himself gliding through
the air and down towards one of the large stately windows on the rst oor
of the building behind the dais from which the speaker was addressing the
crowd.

he experienced a moments panic as he sailed straight through towards
the window, which passed when a second or so later he found he had gone
right through the solid glass without apparently touching it.

no one in the room remarked on his peculiar arrival, which is hardly
surprising as he wasnt there. he began to realize that the whole experience
was merely a recorded projection which knocked six-track seventy-millimetre
into a cocked hat.

the room was much as slartibartfast had described it. in seven and a
half million years it had been well looked after and cleaned regularly every
century or so. the ultramahagony desk was worn at the edges, the carpet a
little faded now, but the large computer terminal sat in sparkling glory on
the desks leather top, as bright as if it had been constructed yesterday.

two severely dressed men sat respectfully before the terminal and waited.
the time is nearly upon us, said one, and arthur was surprised to see
a word suddenly materialize in thin air just by the mans neck. the word
was loonquawl, and it ashed a couple of times and the disappeared again.
before arthur was able to assimilate this the other man spoke and the word
phouchg appeared by his neck.

seventy-ve thousand generations ago, our ancestors set this program
in motion, the second man said, and in all that time we will be the rst to
hear the computer speak.an awesome prospect, phouchg, agreed the rst man, and arthur sud-

denly realized that he was watching a recording with subtitles.

we are the ones who will hear, said phouchg, the answer to the great

question of life . . . !

the universe . . . ! said loonquawl.
and everything . . . !
shhh, said loonquawl with a slight gesture, i think deep thought is

preparing to speak!

there was a moments expectant pause whilst panels slowly came to life
on the front of the console. lights ashed on and o experimentally and
settled down into a businesslike pattern. a soft low hum came from the
communication channel.

good morning, said deep thought at last.
er . . . good morning, o deep thought, said loonquawl nervously, do

you have . . . er, that is . . . 

an answer for you? interrupted deep thought majestically. yes. i

have.

the two men shivered with expectancy. their waiting had not been in

vain.

there really is one? breathed phouchg.
there really is one, conrmed deep thought.
to everything? to the great question of life, the universe and every-

thing?

yes.
both of the men had been trained for this moment, their lives had been a
preparation for it, they had been selected at birth as those who would witness
the answer, but even so they found themselves gasping and squirming like
excited children.

and youre ready to give it to us? urged loonquawl.
i am.
now?
now, said deep thought.
they both licked their dry lips.
though i dont think, added deep thought, that youre going to like

it.

doesnt matter! said phouchg. we must know it! now!
now? inquired deep thought.
yes! now . . . 
all right, said the computer and settled into silence again. the two

men dgeted. the tension was unbearable.

youre really not going to like it, observed deep thought.tell us!
all right, said deep thought. the answer to the great question . . . 
yes . . . !
of life, the universe and everything . . .  said deep thought.
yes . . . !
is . . .  said deep thought, and paused.
yes . . . !
is . . . 
yes . . . !!!. . . ?
forty-two, said deep thought, with innite majesty and calm.

it was a long time before anyone spoke.

out of the corner of his eye phouchg could see the sea of tense expectant

faces down in the square outside.

were going to get lynched arent we? he whispered.
it was a tough assignment, said deep thought mildly.
forty-two! yelled loonquawl. is that all youve got to show for seven

and a half million years work?

i checked it very thoroughly, said the computer, and that quite def-
initely is the answer. i think the problem, to be quite honest with you, is
that youve never actually known what the question is.

but it was the great question! the ultimate question of life, the

universe and everything! howled loonquawl.

yes, said deep thought with the air of one who suers fools gladly,

but what actually is it?

a slow stupeed silence crept over the men as they stared at the computer

and then at each other.

well, you know, its just everything . . . everything . . .  oered phouchg

weakly.

exactly! said deep thought. so once you do know what the question

actually is, youll know what the answer means.

oh terric, muttered phouchg inging aside his notebook and wiping

away a tiny tear.

look, alright, alright, said loonquawl, can you just please tell us the

question?

the ultimate question?
yes!
of life, the universe, and everything?
yes!
deep thought pondered this for a moment.
tricky, he said.but can you do it? cried loonquawl.
deep thought pondered this for another long moment.
finally: no, he said rmly.
both men collapsed on to their chairs in despair.
but ill tell you who can, said deep thought.
they both looked up sharply.
who? tell us!
suddenly arthur began to feel his apparently non-existent scalp begin to
crawl as he found himself moving slowly but inexorably forward towards the
console, but it was only a dramatic zoom on the part of whoever had made
the recording he assumed.

i speak of none other than the computer that is to come after me, in-
toned deep thought, his voice regaining its accustomed declamatory tones.
a computer whose merest operational parameters i am not worthy to cal-
culate  and yet i will design it for you. a computer which can calculate
the question to the ultimate answer, a computer of such innite and subtle
complexity that organic life itself shall form part of its operational matrix.
and you yourselves shall take on new forms and go down into the computer
to navigate its ten-million-year program! yes! i shall design this computer
for you. and i shall name it also unto you. and it shall be called . . . the
earth.

phouchg gaped at deep thought.
what a dull name, he said and great incisions appeared down the length
of his body. loonquawl too suddenly sustained horric gashed from nowhere.
the computer console blotched and cracked, the walls ickered and crumbled
and the room crashed upwards into its own ceiling . . .

slartibartfast was standing in front of arthur holding the two wires.
end of the tape, he explained.

zaphod! wake up!

mmmmmwwwwwerrrrr?
hey come on, wake up.
just let me stick to what im good at, yeah? muttered zaphod and

rolled away from the voice back to sleep.

do you want me to kick you? said ford.
would it give you a lot of pleasure? said zaphod, blearily.
no.
nor me. so whats the point? stop bugging me. zaphod curled himself

up.

he got a double dose of the gas, said trillian looking down at him, two

windpipes.

and stop talking, said zaphod, its hard enough trying to sleep any-

way. whats the matter with the ground? its all cold and hard.

its gold, said ford.
with an amazingly balletic movement zaphod was standing and scanning
the horizon, because that was how far the gold ground stretched in every
direction, perfectly smooth and solid. it gleamed like . . . its impossible to
say what it gleamed like because nothing in the universe gleams in quite the
same way that a planet of solid gold does.

who put all that there? yelped zaphod, goggle-eyed.
dont get excited, said ford, its only a catalogue.
a who?
a catalogue, said trillian, an illusion.
how can you say that? cried zaphod, falling to his hands and knees
and staring at the ground. he poked it and prodded it with his ngernail. it
was very heavy and very slightly soft  he could mark it with his ngernail.
it was very yellow and very shiny, and when he breathed on it his breath
evaporated o it in that very peculiar and special way that breath evaporates
o solid gold.trillian and i came round a while ago, said ford. we shouted and
yelled till somebody came and then carried on shouting and yelling till they
got fed up and put us in their planet catalogue to keep us busy till they were
ready to deal with us. this is all sens-o-tape.

zaphod stared at him bitterly.
ah, shit, he said, you wake me up from my own perfectly good dream

to show me somebody elses. he sat down in a hu.

whats that series of valleys over there? he said.
hallmark, said ford. we had a look.
we didnt wake you earlier, said trillian. the last planet was knee

deep in sh.

fish?
some people like the oddest things.
and before that, said ford, we had platinum. bit dull. we thought

youd like to see this one though.

seas of light glared at them in one solid blaze wherever they looked.
very pretty, said zaphod petulantly.
in the sky a huge green catalogue number appeared.

it ickered and

changed, and when they looked around again so had the land.

as with one voice they all went, yuch.
the sea was purple. the beach they were on was composed of tiny yellow
and green pebbles  presumably terribly precious stones. the mountains in
the distance seemed soft and undulating with red peaks. nearby stood a
solid silver beach table with a frilly mauve parasol and silver tassles.

in the sky a huge sign appeared, replacing the catalogue number. it said,

whatever your tastes, magrathea can cater for you. we are not proud.

and ve hundred entirely naked women dropped out of the sky on parachutes.
in a moment the scene vanished and left them in a springtime meadow

full of cows.

ow! said zaphod. my brains!
you want to talk about it? said ford.
yeah, okay, said zaphod, and all three sat down and ignored the scenes

that came and went around them.

i gure this, said zaphod. whatever happened to my mind, i did it.
and i did it in such a way that it wouldnt be detected by the government
screening tests. and i wasnt to know anything about it myself. pretty crazy,
right?

the other two nodded in agreement.
so i reckon, whats so secret that i cant let anybody know i know it,
not the galactic government, not even myself? and the answer is i dont
know. obviously. but i put a few things together and i can begin to guess.when did i decide to run for president? shortly after the death of president
yooden vranx. you remember yooden, ford?

yeah, said ford, he was that guy we met when we were kids, the
arcturan captain. he was a gas. he gave us conkers when you bust your
way into his megafreighter. said you were the most amazing kid hed ever
met.

whats all this? said trillian.
ancient history, said ford, when we were kids together on betelgeuse.
the arcturan megafreighters used to carry most of the bulky trade between
the galactic centre and the outlying regions the betelgeuse trading scouts
used to nd the markets and the arcturans would supply them. there was a
lot of trouble with space pirates before they were wiped out in the dordellis
wars, and the megafreighters had to be equipped with the most fantastic
defence shields known to galactic science. they were real brutes of ships,
and huge. in orbit round a planet they would eclipse the sun.

one day, young zaphod here decides to raid one. on a tri-jet scooter
designed for stratosphere work, a mere kid. i mean forget it, it was crazier
than a mad monkey.
i went along for the ride because id got some very
safe money on him not doing it, and didnt want him coming back with fake
evidence. so what happens? we got in his tri-jet which he had souped up
into something totally other, crossed three parsecs in a matter of weeks, bust
our way into a megafreighter i still dont know how, marched on to the bridge
waving toy pistols and demanded conkers. a wilder thing i have not known.
lost me a years pocket money. for what? conkers.

the captain was this really amazing guy, yooden vranx, said zaphod.
he gave us food, booze  stu from really weird parts of the galaxy 
lots of conkers of course, and we had just the most incredible time. then
he teleported us back. into the maximum security wing of betelgeuse state
prison. he was a cool guy. went on to become president of the galaxy.

zaphod paused.
the scene around them was currently plunged into gloom. dark mists
swirled round them and elephantine shapes lurked indistinctly in the shad-
ows. the air was occasionally rent with the sounds of illusory beings mur-
dering other illusory beings. presumably enough people must have liked this
sort of thing to make it a paying proposition.

ford, said zaphod quietly.
yeah?
just before yooden died he came to see me.
what? you never told me.
no.
what did he say? what did he come to see you about?he told me about the heart of gold. it was his idea that i should steal

it.

his idea?
yeah, said zaphod, and the only possible way of stealing it was to be

at the launching ceremony.

ford gaped at him in astonishment for a moment, and then roared with

laughter.

are you telling me, he said, that you set yourself up to become pres-

ident of the galaxy just to steal that ship?

thats it, said zaphod with the sort of grin that would get most people

locked away in a room with soft walls.

but why? said ford. whats so important about having it?
dunno, said zaphod, i think if id consciously known what was so
important about it and what i would need it for it would have showed up
on the brain screening tests and i would never have passed. i think yooden
told me a lot of things that are still locked away.

so you think you went and mucked about inside your own brain as a

result of yooden talking to you?

he was a hell of a talker.
yeah, but zaphod old mate, you want to look after yourself you know.
zaphod shrugged.
i mean, dont you have any inkling of the reasons for all this? asked

ford.

zaphod thought hard about this and doubts seemed to cross his mind.
no, he said at last, i dont seem to be letting myself into any of my
i

secrets. still, he added on further reection, i can understand that.
wouldnt trust myself further than i could spit a rat.

a moment later, the last planet in the catalogue vanished from beneath

them and the solid world resolved itself again.

they were sitting in a plush waiting room full of glass-top tables and

design awards.

a tall magrathean man was standing in front of them. the mice will

see you now, he said.

so there you have it, said slartibartfast, making a feeble and perfunctory
attempt to clear away some of the appalling mess of his study. he picked up
a paper from the top of a pile, but then couldnt think of anywhere else to
put it, so he but it back on top of the original pile which promptly fell over.
deep thought designed the earth, we built it and you lived on it.

and the vogons came and destroyed it ve minutes before the program
was completed, added arthur, not unbitterly. yes, said the old man,
pausing to gaze hopelessly round the room. ten million years of planning
and work gone just like that. ten million years, earthman . . . can you con-
ceive of that kind of time span? a galactic civilization could grow from a
single worm ve times over in that time. gone. he paused. well thats
bureaucracy for you, he added.

you know, said arthur thoughtfully, all this explains a lot of things.
all through my life ive had this strange unaccountable feeling that something
was going on in the world, something big, even sinister, and no one would
tell me what it was.

no, said the old man, thats just perfectly normal paranoia. everyone

in the universe has that.

everyone? said arthur. well, if everyone has that perhaps it means

something! perhaps somewhere outside the universe we know . . . 

maybe. who cares? said slartibartfast before arthur got too excited.
perhaps im old and tired, he continued, but i always think that the
chances of nding out what really is going on are so absurdly remote that
the only thing to do is to say hang the sense of it and just keep yourself
occupied. look at me: i design coastlines. i got an award for norway.

he rummaged around in a pile of debris and pulled out a large perspex

block with his name on it and a model of norway moulded into it.

wheres the sense in that? he said. none that ive been able to make
out. ive been doing fjords in all my life. for a eeting moment they become
fashionable and i get a major award.he turned it over in his hands with a shrug and tossed it aside carelessly,

but not so carelessly that it didnt land on something soft.

in this replacement earth were building theyve given me africa to do
and of course im doing it with all fjords again because i happen to like them,
and im old fashioned enough to think that they give a lovely baroque feel
to a continent. and they tell me its not equatorial enough. equatorial!
he gave a hollow laugh. what does it matter? science has achieved some
wonderful things of course, but id far rather be happy than right any day.

and are you?
no. thats where it all falls down of course.
pity, said arthur with sympathy. it sounded like quite a good lifestyle

otherwise.

somewhere on the wall a small white light ashed.
come, said slartibartfast, you are to meet the mice. your arrival on
the planet has caused considerable excitement. it has already been hailed, so
i gather, as the third most improbable event in the history of the universe.

what were the rst two?
oh, probably just coincidences, said slartibartfast carelessly. he opened

the door and stood waiting for arthur to follow.

arthur glanced around him once more, and then down at himself, at the
sweaty dishevelled clothes he had been lying in the mud in on thursday
morning.

i seem to be having tremendous diculty with my lifestyle, he muttered

to himself.

i beg your pardon? said the old man mildly.
oh nothing, said arthur, only joking.

it is of course well known that careless talk costs lives, but the full scale of
the problem is not always appreciated.

for instance, at the very moment that arthur said i seem to be having
tremendous diculty with my lifestyle, a freak wormhole opened up in the
fabric of the space-time continuum and carried his words far far back in time
across almost innite reaches of space to a distant galaxy where strange and
warlike beings were poised on the brink of frightful interstellar battle.

the two opposing leaders were meeting for the last time.
a dreadful silence fell across the conference table as the commander of the
vlhurgs, resplendent in his black jewelled battle shorts, gazed levelly at the
ggugvuntt leader squatting opposite him in a cloud of green sweet-smelling
steam, and, with a million sleek and horribly beweaponed star cruisers poised
to unleash electric death at his single word of command, challenged the vile
creature to take back what it had said about his mother.

the creature stirred in his sickly broiling vapour, and at that very moment
the words i seem to be having tremendous diculty with my lifestyle drifted
across the conference table.

unfortunately, in the vlhurg tongue this was the most dreadful insult
imaginable, and there was nothing for it but to wage terrible war for centuries.
eventually of course, after their galaxy had been decimated over a few
thousand years, it was realized that the whole thing had been a ghastly
mistake, and so the two opposing battle eets settled their few remaining
dierences in order to launch a joint attack on our own galaxy  now posi-
tively identied as the source of the oending remark.

for thousands more years the mighty ships tore across the empty wastes
of space and nally dived screaming on to the rst planet they came across
 which happened to be the earth  where due to a terrible miscalculation
of scale the entire battle eet was accidentally swallowed by a small dog.

those who study the complex interplay of cause and eect in the history
of the universe say that this sort of thing is going on all the time, but thatwe are powerless to prevent it.

its just life, they say.

a short aircar trip brought arthur and the old magrathean to a doorway.
they left the car and went through the door into a waiting room full of
glass-topped tables and perspex awards. almost immediately, a light ashed
above the door at the other side of the room and they entered.

arthur! youre safe! a voice cried.
am i? said arthur, rather startled. oh good.
the lighting was rather subdued and it took him a moment or so to see
ford, trillian and zaphod sitting round a large table beautifully decked out
with exotic dishes, strange sweetmeats and bizarre fruits. they were stung
their faces.

what happened to you? demanded arthur.
well, said zaphod, attacking a boneful of grilled muscle, our guests
here have been gassing us and zapping our minds and being generally weird
and have now given us a rather nice meal to make it up to us. here, he
said hoiking out a lump of evil smelling meat from a bowl, have some vegan
rhinos cutlet. its delicious if you happen to like that sort of thing.

hosts? said arthur. what hosts? i dont see any . . . 
a small voice said, welcome to lunch, earth creature.
arthur glanced around and suddenly yelped.
ugh! he said. there are mice on the table!
there was an awkward silence as everyone looked pointedly at arthur.
he was busy staring at two white mice sitting in what looked like whisky

glasses on the table. he heard the silence and glanced around at everyone.

oh! he said, with sudden realization. oh, im sorry, i wasnt quite

prepared for . . . 

let me introduce you, said trillian. arthur this is benji mouse.
hi, said one of the mice. his whiskers stroked what must have been
a touch sensitive panel on the inside of the whisky-glass like aair, and it
moved forward slightly.

and this is frankie mouse.
the other mouse said, pleased to meet you, and did likewise.
arthur gaped. but arent they . . . 
yes, said trillian, they are the mice i brought with me from the

earth.

she looked him in the eye and arthur thought he detected the tiniest

resigned shrug.

could you pass me that bowl of grated arcturan megadonkey? she

said.slartibartfast coughed politely.
er, excuse me, he said.
yes, thank you slartibartfast, said benji mouse sharply, you may go.
what? oh . . . er, very well, said the old man, slightly taken aback, ill

just go and get on with some of my fjords then.

ah, well in fact that wont be necessary, said frankie mouse. it looks
very much as if we wont be needing the new earth any longer. he swivelled
his pink little eyes. not now that we have found a native of the planet who
was there seconds before it was destroyed.

what? cried slartibartfast, aghast. you cant mean that! ive got a

thousand glaciers poised and ready to roll over africa!

well perhaps you can take a quick skiing holiday before you dismantle

them, said frankie, acidly.

skiing holiday! cried the old man. those glaciers are works of art!
elegantly sculptured contours, soaring pinnacles of ice, deep majestic ravines!
it would be sacrilege to go skiing on high art!

thank you slartibartfast, said benji rmly. that will be all.
yes sir, said the old man coldly, thank you very much. well, goodbye

earthman, he said to arthur, hope the lifestyle comes together.

with a brief nod to the rest of the company he turned and walked sadly

out of the room.

arthur stared after him not knowing what to say.
now, said benji mouse, to business.
ford and zaphod clinked their glasses together.
to business! they said. i beg your pardon? said benji.
ford looked round.
sorry, i thought you were proposing a toast, he said.
the two mice scuttled impatiently around in their glass transports. fi-
nally they composed themselves, and benji moved forward to address arthur.
now, earth creature, he said, the situation we have in eect is this.
we have, as you know, been more or less running your planet for the last
ten million years in order to nd this wretched thing called the ultimate
question.

why? said arthur, sharply.
no  we already thought of that one, said frankie interrupting, but it

doesnt t the answer. why?  forty-two . . . you see, it doesnt work.

no, said arthur, i mean why have you been doing it?
oh, i see, said frankie. well, eventually just habit i think, to be
brutally honest. and this is more or less the point  were sick to the teeth
with the whole thing, and the prospect of doing it all over again on account
of those whinnet-ridden vogons quite frankly gives me the screaming heebyjeebies, you know what i mean? it was by the merest lucky chance that benji
and i nished our particular job and left the planet early for a quick holiday,
and have since manipulated our way back to magrathea by the good oces
of your friends.

magrathea is a gateway back to our own dimension, put in benji.
since when, continued his murine colleague, we have had an oer of
a quite enormously fat contract to do the 5d chat show and lecture circuit
back in our own dimensional neck of the woods, and were very much inclined
to take it.

i would, wouldnt you ford? said zaphod promptingly.
oh yes, said ford, jump at it, like a shot.
arthur glanced at them, wondering what all this was leading up to.
but weve got to have a product you see, said frankie, i mean ideally

we still need the ultimate question in some form or other.

zaphod leaned forward to arthur.
you see, he said, if theyre just sitting there in the studio looking
very relaxed and, you know, just mentioning that they happen to know the
answer to life, the universe and everything, and then eventually have to
admit that in fact its forty-two, then the shows probably quite short. no
follow-up, you see.

we have to have something that sounds good, said benji.
something that sounds good? exclaimed arthur. an ultimate ques-

tion that sounds good? from a couple of mice?

the mice bristled.
well, i mean, yes idealism, yes the dignity of pure research, yes the
pursuit of truth in all its forms, but there comes a point im afraid where
you begin to suspect that if theres any real truth, its that the entire multi-
dimensional innity of the universe is almost certainly being run by a bunch
of maniacs. and if it comes to a choice between spending yet another ten
million years nding that out, and on the other hand just taking the money
and running, then i for one could do with the exercise, said frankie.

but . . .  started arthur, hopelessly.
hey, will you get this, earthman, interrupted zaphod. you are a last
generation product of that computer matrix, right, and you were there right
up to the moment your planet got the nger, yeah?

er . . . 
so your brain was an organic part of the penultimate conguration of

the computer programme, said ford, rather lucidly he thought.

right? said zaphod.
well, said arthur doubtfully. he wasnt aware of ever having felt an

organic part of anything. he had always seen this as one of his problems.in other words, said benji, steering his curious little vehicle right over to
arthur, theres a good chance that the structure of the question is encoded
in the structure of your brain  so we want to buy it o you.

what, the question? said arthur.
yes, said ford and trillian.
for lots of money, said zaphod.
no, no, said frankie, its the brain we want to buy.
what!
well, who would miss it? inquired benjy.
i thought you said you could just read his brain electronically, protested

ford.

oh yes, said frankie, but wed have to get it out rst. its got to be

prepared.

treated, said benji.
diced.
thank you, shouted arthur, tipping up his chair and backing away

from the table in horror.

it could always be replaced, said benji reasonably, if you think its

important.

yes, an electronic brain, said frankie, a simple one would suce.
a simple one! wailed arthur.
yeah, said zaphod with a sudden evil grin, youd just have to program
it to say what? and i dont understand and wheres the tea?  whod know
the dierence?

what? cried arthur, backing away still further.
see what i mean? said zaphod and howled with pain because of some-

thing that trillian did at that moment.

id notice the dierence, said arthur.
no you wouldnt, said frankie mouse, youd be programmed not to.
ford made for the door.
look, im sorry, mice old lads, he said. i dont think weve got a deal.
i rather think we have to have a deal, said the mice in chorus, all
the charm vanishing fro their piping little voices in an instant. with a tiny
whining shriek their two glass transports lifted themselves o the table, and
swung through the air towards arthur, who stumbled further backwards into
a blind corner, utterly unable to cope or think of anything.

trillian grabbed him desperately by the arm and tried to drag him to-
wards the door, which ford and zaphod were struggling to open, but arthur
was dead weight  he seemed hypnotized by the airborne rodents swooping
towards him.

she screamed at him, but he just gaped.with one more yank, ford and zaphod got the door open. on the other
side of it was a small pack of rather ugly men who they could only assume
were the heavy mob of magrathea. not only were they ugly themselves, but
the medical equipment they carried with them was also far from pretty. they
charged.

so  arthur was about to have his head cut open, trillian was unable to
help him, and ford and zaphod were about to be set upon by several thugs
a great deal heavier and more sharply armed than they were.

all in all it was extremely fortunate that at that moment every alarm on

the planet burst into an earsplitting din.

emergency! emergency! blared the klaxons throughout magrathea. hos-
tile ship has landed on planet. armed intruders in section 8a. defence sta-
tions, defence stations!

the two mice snied irritably round the fragments of their glass trans-
ports where they lay shattered on the oor. damnation, muttered frankie
mouse, all that fuss over two pounds of earthling brain. he scuttled round
and about, his pink eyes ashing, his ne white coat bristling with static.
the only thing we can do now, said benji, crouching and stroking his
whiskers in thought, is to try and fake a question, invent one that will
sound plausible.

dicult, said frankie. he thought. how about whats yellow and

dangerous? 

benji considered this for a moment.
no, no good, he said. doesnt t the answer.
they sank into silence for a few seconds.
all right, said benji. what do you get if you multiply six by seven?
no, no, too literal, too factual, said frankie, wouldnt sustain the

punters interest.

again they thought.
then frankie said: heres a thought. how many roads must a man walk

down? 

ah, said benji. aha, now that does sound promising! he rolled
the phrase around a little. yes, he said, thats excellent! sounds very
signicant without actually tying you down to meaning anything at all. how
many roads must a man walk down? forty-two. excellent, excellent, thatll
fox em. frankie baby, we are made!

they performed a scampering dance in their excitement.
near them on the oor lay several rather ugly men who had been hit

about the head with some heavy design awards.

half a mile away, four gures pounded up a corridor looking for a wayout. they emerged into a wide open-plan computer bay. they glanced about
wildly.

which way do you reckon zaphod? said ford.
at a wild guess, id say down here, said zaphod, running o down
to the right between a computer bank and the wall. as the others started
after him he was brought up short by a kill-o-zap energy bolt that cracked
through the air inches in front of him and fried a small section of adjacent
wall.

a voice on a bullhorn said, okay beeblebrox, hold it right there. weve

got you covered.

cops! hissed zaphod, and span around in a crouch. you want to try

a guess at all, ford?

okay, this way, said ford, and the four of them ran down a gangway

between two computer banks.

at the end of the gangway appeared a heavily armoured and spacesuited

gure waving a vicious kill-o-zap gun.

we dont want to shoot you, beeblebrox! shouted the gure.

suits me ne! shouted zaphod back and dived down a wide gap between

two data process units.

the others swerved in behind him.
there are two of them, said trillian. were cornered.
they squeezed themselves down in an angle between a large computer

data bank and the wall.

they held their breath and waited.
suddenly the air exploded with energy bolts as both the cops opened re

on them simultaneously.

hey, theyre shooting at us, said arthur, crouching in a tight ball, i

thought they said they didnt want to do that.

yeah, i thought they said that, agreed ford.
zaphod stuck a head up for a dangerous moment.
hey, he said, i thought you said you didnt want to shoot us! and

ducked again.

they waited.
after a moment a voice replied, it isnt easy being a cop!
what did he say? whispered ford in astonishment.
he said it isnt easy being a cop.
well surely thats his problem isnt it?
id have thought so.
ford shouted out, hey listen! i think weve got enough problems on our
own having you shooting at us, so if you could avoid laying your problemson us as well, i think wed all nd it easier to cope!

another pause, and then the bullhorn again.
now see here, guy, said the voice, youre not dealing with any dumb
two-bit trigger-pumping morons with low hairlines, little piggy eyes and no
conversation, were a couple of intelligent caring guys that youd probably
quite like if you met us socially!
i dont go around gratuitously shooting
people and then bragging about it afterwards in seedy space-rangers bars,
like some cops i could mention! i go around shooting people gratuitously
and then i agonize about it afterwards for hours to my girlfriend!

and i write novels! chimed in the other cop. though i havent had

any of them published yet, so i better warn you, im in a meeeean mood!

fords eyes popped halfway out of their sockets. who are these guys?

he said.

dunno, said zaphod, i think i preferred it when they were shooting.
so are you going to come quietly, shouted one of the cops again, or

are you going to let us blast you out?

which would you prefer? shouted ford.
a millisecond later the air about them started to fry again, as bolt after

bolt of kill-o-zap hurled itself into the computer bank in front of them.

the fusillade continued for several seconds at unbearable intensity.
when it stopped, there were a few seconds of near quietness ad the echoes

died away.

you still there? called one of the cops.
yes, they called back.
we didnt enjoy doing that at all, shouted the other cop.
we could tell, shouted ford.
now, listen to this, beeblebrox, and you better listen good!
why? shouted back zaphod.
because, shouted the cop, its going to be very intelligent, and quite
interesting and humane! now either you all give yourselves up now and let
us beat you up a bit, though not very much of course because we are rmly
opposed to needless violence, or we blow up this entire planet and possibly
one or two others we noticed on our way out here!

but thats crazy! cried trillian. you wouldnt do that!
oh yes we would, shouted the cop, wouldnt we? he asked the other

one.

oh yes, wed have to, no question, the other one called back.
but why? demanded trillian. because there are some things you
have to do even if you are an enlightened liberal cop who knows all about
sensitivity and everything!

i just dont believe these guys, muttered ford, shaking his head.one cop shouted to the other, shall we shoot them again for a bit?
yeah, why not?
they let y another electric barrage.
the heat and noise was quite fantastic. slowly, the computer bank was
beginning to disintegrate. the front had almost all melted away, and thick
rivulets of molten metal were winding their way back towards where they
were squatting. they huddled further back and waited for the end.

but the end never came, at least not then.

quite suddenly the barrage stopped, and the sudden silence afterwards

was punctuated by a couple of strangled gurgles and thuds.

the four stared at each other.
what happened? said arthur.
they stopped, said zaphod with a shrug.
why?
dunno, do you want to go and ask them?
no.
they waited.
hello? called out ford.
no answer.
thats odd.
perhaps its a trap.
they havent the wit.
what were those thuds?
dunno.
they waited for a few more seconds.
right, said ford, im going to have a look.
he glanced round at the others.
is no one going to say, no you cant possibly, let me go instead ?
they all shook their heads.
oh well, he said, and stood up.
for a moment, nothing happened.
then, after a second or so, nothing continued to happen. ford peered

through the thick smoke that was billowing out of the burning computer.

cautiously he stepped out into the open.
still nothing happened.
twenty yards away he could dimly see through the smoke the space-suited
gure of one of the cops. he was lying in a crumpled heap on the ground.twenty yards in the other direction lay the second man. no one else was
anywhere to be seen.

this struck ford as being extremely odd.
slowly, nervously, he walked towards the rst one. the body lay reassur-
ingly still as he approached it, and continued to lie reassuringly still as he
reached it and put his foot down on the kill-o-zap gun that still dangled
from its limp ngers.

he reached down and picked it up, meeting no resistance.
the cop was quite clearly dead.
a quick examination revealed him to be from blagulon kappa  he was a
methane-breathing life form, dependent on his space suit for survival in the
thin oxygen atmosphere of magrathea.

the tiny life-support system computer on his backpack appeared unex-

pectedly to have blown up.

ford poked around in it in considerable astonishment. these miniature
suit computers usually had the full back-up of the main computer back on the
ship, with which they were directly linked through the sub-etha. such a sys-
tem was fail-safe in all circumstances other than total feedback malfunction,
which was unheard of.

he hurried over to the other prone gure, and discovered that exactly the

same impossible thing had happened to him, presumably simultaneously.

he called the others over to look. they came, shared his astonishment,

but not his curiosity.

lets get shot out of this hole, said zaphod. if whatever im supposed
to be looking for is here, i dont want it. he grabbed the second kill-o-zap
gun, blasted a perfectly harmless accounting computer and rushed out into
the corridor, followed by the others. he very nearly blasted hell out of an
aircar that stood waiting for them a few yards away. the aircar was empty,
but arthur recognized it as belonging to slartibartfast.

it had a note from him pinned to part of its sparse instrument panel. the

note had an arrow drawn on it, pointing at one of the controls.

it said, this is probably the best button to press.

the aircar rocketed them at speeds in excess of r17 through the steel tunnels
that lead out onto the appalling surface of the planet which was now in the
grip of yet another drear morning twilight. ghastly grey lights congealed on
the land.

r is a velocity measure, dened as a reasonable speed of travel that
is consistent with health, mental wellbeing and not being more than say
ve minutes late. it is therefore clearly an almost innitely variable gure
according to circumstances, since the rst two factors vary not only with
speed taken as an absolute, but also with awareness of the third factor. unless
handled with tranquility this equation can result in considerable stress, ulcers
and even death.

r17 is not a xed velocity, but it is clearly far too fast.
the aircar ung itself through the air at r17 and above, deposited them
next to the heart of gold which stood starkly on the frozen ground like
a bleached bone, and then precipitately hurled itself back in the direction
whence they had come, presumably on important business of its own.

shivering, the four of them stood and looked at the ship.
beside it stood another one.
it was the blagulon kappa policecraft, a bulbous sharklike aair, slate
green in colour and smothered with black stencilled letters of varying degrees
of size and unfriendliness. the letters informed anyone who cared to read
them as to where the ship was from, what section of the police it was assigned
to, and where the power feeds should be connected.

it seemed somehow unnaturally dark and silent, even for a ship whose two-
man crew was at that moment lying asphyxicated in a smoke-lled chamber
several miles beneath the ground. it is one of those curious things that is
impossible to explain or dene, but one can sense when a ship is completely
dead.

ford could sense it and found it most mysterious  a ship and two police-
men seemed to have gone spontaneously dead. in his experience the universesimply didnt work like that.

the other three could sense it too, but they could sense the bitter cold
even more and hurried back into the heart of gold suering from an acute
attack of no curiosity.

ford stayed, and went to examine the blagulon ship. as he walked, he

nearly tripped over an inert steel gure lying face down in the cold dust.

marvin! he exclaimed. what are you doing?
dont feel you have to take any notice of me, please, came a mued

drone.

but how are you, metalman? said ford.
very depressed.
whats up?
i dont know, said marvin, ive never been there.
why, said ford squatting down beside him and shivering, are you

lying face down in the dust?

its a very eective way of being wretched, said marvin. dont pretend

you want to talk to me, i know you hate me.

no i dont.
yes you do, everybody does. its part of the shape of the universe. i
only have to talk to somebody and they begin to hate me. even robots hate
me. if you just ignore me i expect i shall probably go away.

he jacked himself up to his feet and stood resolutely facing the opposite

direction.

that ship hated me, he said dejectedly, indicating the policecraft.
that ship? said ford in sudden excitement. what happened to it?

do you know?

it hated me because i talked to it.
you talked to it? exclaimed ford. what do you mean you talked to

it?

simple. i got very bored and depressed, so i went and plugged myself in
to its external computer feed. i talked to the computer at great length and
explained my view of the universe to it, said marvin.

and what happened? pressed ford.
it committed suicide, said marvin and stalked o back to the heart of

gold.

that night, as the heart of gold was busy putting a few light years between
itself and the horsehead nebula, zaphod lounged under the small palm tree
on the bridge trying to bang his brain into shape with massive pan galactic
gargle blasters; ford and trillian sat in a corner discussing life and matters
arising from it; and arthur took to his bed to ip through fords copy of the
hitchhikers guide to the galaxy. since he was going to live in the place, he
reasoned, hed better start nding out something about it.

he came across this entry.
it said: the history of every major galactic civilization tends to pass
through three distinct and recognizable phases, those of survival, inquiry and
sophistication, otherwise known as the how, why and where phases.

for instance, the rst phase is characterized by the question how can
we eat? the second by the question why do we eat? and the third by the
question where shall we have lunch?

he got no further before the ships intercom buzzed into life.
hey earthman? you hungry kid? said zaphods voice.
er, well yes, a little peckish i suppose, said arthur.
okay, baby, hold tight, said zaphod. well take in a quick bite at the

restaurant at the end of the universe.the restaurant at the end of the universe

douglas adams

2

there is a theory which states that if ever anyone discovers exactly what the
universe is for and why it is here, it will instantly disappear and be replaced

by something even more bizarre and inexplicable.

there is another theory which states that this has already happened.4

introduction

the story so far:
in the beginning the universe was created.
this has made a lot of people very angry and been widely regarded as a bad
move.
many races believe that it was created by some sort of god, though the ja-
travartid people of viltvodle vi believe that the entire universe was in fact
sneezed out of the nose of a being called the great green arkleseizure.
the jatravartids, who live in perpetual fear of the time they call the coming
of the great white handkerchief, are small blue creatures with more than
fifty arms each, who are therefore unique in being the only race in history to
have invented the aerosol deodorant before the wheel.
however, the great green arkleseizure theory is not widely accepted outside
viltvodle vi and so, the universe being the puzzling place it is, other expla-
nations are constantly being sought.
for instance, a race of hyperintelligent pan-dimensional beings once built them-
selves a gigantic supercomputer called deep thought to calculate once and for
all the answer to the ultimate question of life, the universe, and everything.
for seven and a half million years, deep thought computed and calculated,
and in the end announced that the answer was in fact forty-two - and so
another, even bigger, computer had to be built to find out what the actual
question was.
and this computer, which was called the earth, was so large that it was fre-
quently mistaken for a planet - especially by the strange ape-like beings who
roamed its surface, totally unaware that they were simply part of a gigantic
computer program.
and this is very odd, because without that fairly simple and obvious piece of
knowledge, nothing that ever happened on the earth could possibly make the
slightest bit of sense.
sadly however, just before the critical moment of readout, the earth was un-6

expectedly demolished by the vogons to make way - so they claimed - for a
new hyperspace bypass, and so all hope of discovering a meaning for life was
lost for ever.
or so it would seem.
two of there strange, ape-like creatures survived.
arthur dent escaped at the very last moment because an old friend of his,
ford prefect, suddenly turned out to be from a small planet in the vicinity of
betelgeuse and not from guildford as he had hitherto claimed; and, more to
the point, he knew how to hitch rides on flying saucers.
tricia mcmillian - or trillian - had skipped the planet six months earlier with
zaphod beeblebrox, the then president of the galaxy.
two survivors.
they are all that remains of the greatest experiment ever conducted - to find
the ultimate question and the ultimate answer of life, the universe, and
everything.
and, less than half a million miles from where their starship is drifting lazily
through the inky blackness of space, a vogon ship is moving slowly towards
them.



like all vogon ships it looked as if it had been not so much designed as con-
gealed. the unpleasant yellow lumps and edifices which protuded from it at
unsightly angles would have disfigured the looks of most ships, but in this case
that was sadly impossible. uglier things have been spotted in the skies, but
not by reliable witnesses.
in fact to see anything much uglier than a vogon ship you would have to go
inside and look at a vogon. if you are wise, however, this is precisely what you
will avoid doing because the average vogon will not think twice before doing
something so pointlessly hideous to you that you will wish you had never been
born - or (if you are a clearer minded thinker) that the vogon had never been
born.
in fact, the average vogon probably wouldnt even think once. they are simple-
minded, thick-willed, slug-brained creatures, and thinking is not really some-
thing they are cut out for. anatomical analysis of the vogon reveals that its
brain was originally a badly deformed, misplaced and dyspeptic liver. the
fairest thing you can say about them, then, is that they know what they like,
and what they like generally involves hurting people and, wherever possible,
getting very angry.
one thing they dont like is leaving a job unfinished - particularly this vogon,
and particularly - for various reasons - this job.
this vogon was captain prostetnic vogon jeltz of the galactic hyperspace
planning council, and he was it who had had the job of demolishing the so-
called planet earth.
he heaved his monumentally vile body round in his ill-fitting, slimy seat and
stared at the monitor screen on which the starship heart of gold was being
systematically scanned.
it mattered little to him that the heart of gold, with its infinite improbabil-
ity drive, was the most beautiful and revolutionary ship ever built. aesthetics8

chapter 1.

and technology were closed books to him and, had he had his way, burnt and
buried books as well.
it mattered even less to him that zaphod beeblebrox was aboard. zaphod
beeblebrox was now the ex-president of the galaxy, and though every police
force in the galaxy was currently pursuing both him and this ship he had
stolen, the vogon was not interested.
he had other fish to fry.
it has been said that vogons are not above a little bribery and corruption in
the same way that the sea is not above the clouds, and this was certainly true
in his case. when he heard the words integrity or moral rectitude, he
reached for his dictionary, and when he heard the chink of ready money in
large quantities he reached for the rule book and threw it away.
in seeking so implacably the destruction of the earth and all that therein lay
he was moving somewhat above and beyond the call of his professional duty.
there was even some doubt as to whether the said bypass was actually going
to be built, but the matter had been glossed over.
he grunted a repellent grunt of satisfaction.
computer, he croaked, get me my brain care specialist on the line.
within a few seconds the face of gag halfrunt appeared on the screen, smiling
the smile of a man who knew he was ten light years away from the vogon
face he was looking at. mixed up somewhere in the smile was a glint of irony
too. though the vogon persistently referred to him as my private brain care
specialist there was not a lot of brain to take care of, and it was in fact
halfrunt who was employing the vogon. he was paying him an awful lot of
money to do some very dirty work. as one of the galaxys most prominent
and successful psychiatrists, he and a consortium of his colleagues were quite
prepared to spend an awful lot of money when it seemed that the entire future
of psychiatry might be at stake.
well, he said, hello my captain of vogons prostetnic, and how are we feel-
ing today?
the vogon captain told him that in the last few hours he had wiped out nearly
half his crew in a disciplinary exercise.
halfrunts smile did not flicker for an instant.
well, he said, i think this is perfectly normal behaviour for a vogon, you
know? the natural and healthy channelling of the aggressive instincts into
acts of senseless violence.
that, rumbled the vogon, is what you always say.
well again, said halfrunt, i think that this is perfectly normal behaviour
for a psychiatrist. good. we are clearly both very well adjusted in our mental
attitudes today. now tell me, what news of the mission?

9

we have located the ship.
wonderful, said halfrunt, wonderful! and the occupants?
the earthman is there.
excellent! and ...?
a female from the same planet. they are the last.
good, good, beamed halfrunt, who else?
the man prefect.
yes?
and zaphod beeblebrox.
for an instant halfrunts smile flickered.
ah yes, he said, i had been expecting this. it is most regrettable.
a personal friend? inquired the vogon, who had heard the expression some-
where once and decided to try it out.
ah, no, said halfrunt, in my profession you know, we do not make personal
friends.
ah, grunted the vogon, professional detachment.
no, said halfrunt cheerfully, we just dont have the knack.
he paused. his mouth continued to smile, but his eyes frowned slightly.
but beeblebrox, you know, he said, he is one of my most profitable clients.
he had personality problems beyond the dreams of analysts.
he toyed with this thought a little before reluctantly dismissing it.
still, he said, you are ready for your task?
yes.
good. destroy the ship immediately.
what about beeblebrox?
well, said halfrunt brightly, zaphods just this guy, you know?
he vanished from the screen.
the vogon captain pressed a communicator button which connected him with
the remains of his crew.
attack, he said.
at that precise moment zaphod beeblebrox was in his cabin swearing very
loudly. two hours ago, he had said that they would go for a quick bite at the
restaurant at the end of the universe, whereupon he had had a blazing row
with the ships computer and stormed off to his cabin shouting that he would
work out the improbability factors with a pencil.
the heart of golds improbability drive made it the most powerful and un-
predictable ship in existence. there was nothing it couldnt do, provided you
knew exactly how improbable it was that the thing you wanted it to do would
ever happen.
he had stolen it when, as president, he was meant to be launching it. he

10

chapter 1.

didnt know exactly why he had stolen it, except that he liked it.
he didnt know why he had become president of the galaxy, except that it
seemed a fun thing to be.
he did know that there were better reasons than these, but that they were
buried in a dark, locked off section of his two brains. he wished the dark,
locked off section of his two brains would go away because they occasionally
surfaced momentarily and put strange thoughts into the light, fun sections of
his mind and tried to deflect him from what he saw as being the basic business
of his life, which was to have a wonderfully good time.
at the moment he was not having a wonderfully good time. he had run out
of patience and pencils and was feeling very hungry.
starpox! he shouted.
at that same precise moment, ford prefect was in mid air. this was not be-
cause of anything wrong with the ships artificial gravity field, but because he
was leaping down the stair-well which led to the ships personal cabins. it was
a very high jump to do in one bound and he landed awkwardly, stumbled, re-
covered, raced down the corridor sending a couple of miniature service robots
flying, skidded round the corner, burst into zaphods door and explained what
was on his mind.
vogons, he said.
a short while before this, arthur dent had set out from his cabin in search
of a cup of tea. it was not a quest he embarked upon with a great deal of
optimism., because he knew that the only source of hot drinks on the entire
ship was a benighted piece of equipment produced by the sirius cybernetics
corporation. it was called a nutri-matic drinks synthesizer, and he had en-
countered it before.
it claimed to produce the widest possible range of drinks personally matched
to the tastes and metabolism of whoever cared to use it. when put to the
test, however, it invariably produced a plastic cup filled with a liquid that was
almost, but nit quite, entirely unlike tea.
he attempted to reason with the thing.
tea, he said.
share and enjoy, the machine replied and provided him with yet another
cup of the sickly liquid.
he threw it away.
share and enjoy, the machine repeated and provided him with another one.
share and enjoy is the company motto of the hugely successful sirius cy-
bernetics corporation complaints division, which now covers the major land
masses of three medium sized planets and is the only part of the corporation
to have shown a consistent profit in recent years.

11

the motto stands - or rather stood - in three mile high illuminated letters near
the complaints department spaceport on eadrax. unfortunately its weight
was such that shortly after it was erected, the ground beneath the letters caved
in and they dropped for nearly half their length through the offices of many
talented young complaints executives - now deceased.
the protruding upper halves of the letters now appear, in the local language,
to read go stick your head in a pig, and are no longer illuminated, except
at times of special celebration.
arthur threw away a sixth cup of the liquid.
listen, you machine, he said, you claim you can synthesize any drink in
existence, so why do you keep giving me the same undrinkable stuff?
nutrition and pleasurable sense data, burbled the machine. share and en-
joy.
it tastes filthy!
if you have enjoyed the experience of this drink, continued the machine,
why not share it with your friends?
because, said arthur tartly, i want to keep them. will you try to compre-
hend what im telling you? that drink ...
that drink, said the machine sweetly, was individually tailored to meet
your personal requirements for nutrition and pleasure.
ah, said arthur, so im a masochist on diet am i?
share and enjoy.
oh shut up.
will that be all?
arthur decided to give up.
yes, he said.
then he decided hed be dammed if hed give up.
no, he said, look, its very, very simple ... all i want ... is a cup of tea. you
are going to make one for me. keep quiet and listen.
and he sat. he told the nutri-matic about india, he told it about china, he
told it about ceylon. he told it about broad leaves drying in the sun. he told
it about silver teapots. he told it about summer afternoons on the lawn. he
told it about putting in the milk before the tea so it wouldnt get scalded. he
even told it (briefly) about the history of the east india company.
so thats it, is it? said the nutri-matic when he had finished.
yes, said arthur, that is what i want.
you want the taste of dried leaves boiled in water?
er, yes. with milk.
squirted out of a cow?
well, in a manner of speaking i suppose ...

12

chapter 1.

im going to need some help with this one, said the machine tersely. all the
cheerful burbling had dropped out of its voice and it now meant business.
well, anything i can do, said arthur.
youve done quite enough, the nutri-matic informed him.
it summoned up the ships computer.
hi there! said the ships computer.
the nutri-matic explained about tea to the ships computer. the computer
boggled, linked logic circuits with the nutri-matic and together they lapsed
into a grim silence.
arthur watched and waited for a while, but nothing further happened.
he thumped it, but still nothing happened.
eventually he gave up and wandered up to the bridge.
in the empty wastes of space, the heart of gold hung still. around it blazed
the billion pinpricks of the galaxy. towards it crept the ugly yellow lump of
the vogon ship.



does anyone have a kettle? arthur asked as he walked on to the bridge, and
instantly began to wonder why trillian was yelling at the computer to talk to
her, ford was thumping it and zaphod was kicking it, and also why there was
a nasty yellow lump on the vision screen.
he put down the empty cup he was carrying and walked over to them.
hello? he said.
at that moment zaphod flung himself over to the polished marble surfaces
that contained the instruments that controlled the conventional photon drive.
they materialized beneath his hands and he flipped over to manual control.
he pushed, he pulled, he pressed and he swore. the photon drive gave a sickly
judder and cut out again.
something up? said arthur.
hey, didja hear that? muttered zaphod as he leapt now for the manual
controls of the infinite improbability drive, the monkey spoke!
the improbability drive gave two small whines and then also cut out.
pure history, man, said zaphod, kicking the improbability drive, a talking
monkey!
if youre upset about something ... said arthur.
vogons! snapped ford, were under attack!
arthur gibbered.
well what are you doing? lets get out of here!
cant. computers jammed.
jammed?
it says all its circuits are occupied. theres no power anywhere in the ship.
ford moved away from the computer terminal, wiped a sleeve across his fore-
head and slumped back against the wall.
nothing we can do, he said. he glared at nothing and bit his lip.
when arthur had been a boy at school, long before the earth had been demol-14

chapter 2.

ished, he had used to play football. he had not been at all good at it, and his
particular speciality had been scoring own goals in important matches. when-
ever this happened he used to experience a peculiar tingling round the back
of his neck that would slowly creep up across his cheeks and heat his brow.
the image of mud and grass and lots of little jeering boys flinging it at him
suddenly came vividly to his mind at this moment.
a peculiar tingling sensation at the back of his neck was creeping up across
his cheeks and heating his brow.
he started to speak, and stopped.
he started to speak again and stopped again.
finally he managed to speak.
er, he said. he cleared his throat.
tell me, he continued, and said it so nervously that the others all turned to
stare at him. he glanced at the approaching yellow blob on the vision screen.
tell me, he said again, did the computer say what was occupying it? i just
ask out of interest ...
their eyes were riveted on him.
and, er ... well thats it really, just asking.
zaphod put out a hand and held arthur by the scruff of the neck.
what have you done to it, monkeyman? he breathed.
well, said arthur, nothing in fact. its just that i think a short while ago
it was trying to work out how to ...
yes?
make me some tea.
thats right guys, the computer sang out suddenly, just coping with that
problem right now, and wow, its a biggy. be with you in a while. it lapsed
back into a silence that was only matched for sheer intensity by the silence of
the three people staring at arthur dent.
as if to relieve the tension, the vogons chose that moment to start firing.
the ship shook, the ship thundered. outside, the inch thick force-shield around
it blistered, crackled and spat under the barrage of a dozen 30-megahurt
definit-kil photrazon cannon, and looked as if it wouldnt be around for
long. four minutes is how long ford prefect gave it.three minutes and fifty
seconds, he said a short while later.
forty-five seconds, he added at the appropriate time. he flicked idly at
some useless switches, then gave arthur an unfriendly look.
dying for a cup of tea, eh? he said. three minutes and forty seconds.
will you stop counting! snarled zaphod.
yes, said ford prefect, in three minutes and thirty-five seconds.
aboard the vogon ship, prostetnic vogon jeltz was puzzled. he had expected

15

a chase, he had expected an exciting grapple with tractor beams, he had ex-
pected to have to use the specially installed sub-cyclic normality assert-i-
tron to counter the heart of golds infinite improbability drive, but the
sub-cyclic normality assert-i-tron lay idle as the heart of gold just sat there
and took it.
a dozen 30-megahurt definit-kil photrazon cannon continued to blaze away
at the heart of gold, and still it just sat there and took it.
he tested every sensor at his disposal to see if there was any subtle trickery
afoot, but no subtle trickery was to be found.
he didnt know about the tea of course.
nor did he know exactly how the occupants of the heart of gold were spending
the last three minutes and thirty seconds of life they had left to spend.
quite how zaphod beeblebrox arrived at the idea of holding a seance at this
point is something he was never quite clear on.
obviously the subject of death was in the air, but more as something to be
avoided than harped upon.
possibly the horror that zaphod experienced at the prospect of being reunited
with his deceased relatives led on to the thought that they might just feel the
same way about him and, whats more, be able to do something about helping
to postpone this reunion.
or again it might just have been one of the strange promptings that occasion-
ally surfaced from that dark area of his mind that he had inexplicably locked
off prior to becoming president of the galaxy.
you want to talk to your great grandfather? boggled ford.
yeah.
does it have to be now?
the ship continued to shake and thunder. the temperature was rising. the
light was getting dimmer - all the energy the computer didnt require for think-
ing about tea was being pumped into the rapidly fading force-field.
yeah! insisted zaphod. listen ford, i think he may be able to help us.
are you sure you mean think? pick your words with care.
suggest something else we can do.
er, well ...
ok, round the central console. now. come on! trillian, monkeyman, move.
they clustered round the central console in confusion, sat down and, feeling
exceptionally foolish, held hands. with his third hand zaphod turned off the
lights.
darkness gripped the ship.
outside, the thunderous roar of the definit-kil cannon continued to rip at the
force-field.

16

chapter 2.

concentrate, hissed zaphod, on his name.
what is it? asked arthur.
zaphod beeblebrox the fourth.
what?
zaphod beeblebrox the fourth. concentrate!
the fourth?
yeah. listen, im zaphod beeblebrox, my father was zaphod beeblebrox the
second, my grandfather zaphod beeblebrox the third ...
what?
there was an accident with a contraceptive and a time machine. now con-
centrate!
three minutes, said ford prefect.
why, said arthur dent, are we doing this?
shut up, suggested zaphod beeblebrox.
trillian said nothing. what, she thought, was there to say?
the only light on the bridge came from two dim red triangles in a far corner
where marvin the paranoid android sat slumped, ignoring all and ignored by
all, in a private and rather unpleasant world of his own.
round the central console four figures hunched in tight concentration trying
to blot from their minds the terrifying shuddering of the ship and the fearful
roar that echoed through it.
they concentrated.
still they concentrated.
and still they concentrated.
the seconds ticked by.
on zaphods brow stood beads of sweat, first of concentration, then of frus-
tration and finally of embarrassment.
at last he let out a cry of anger, snatched back his hands from trillian and
ford and stabbed at the light switch.
ah, i was beginning to think youd never turn the lights on, said a voice.
no, not too bright please, my eyes arent what they once were.
four figures jolted upright in their seats. slowly they turned their heads to
look, though their scalps showed a distinct propensity to try and stay in the
same place.
now. who disturbs me at this time? said the small, bent, gaunt figure
standing by the sprays of fern at the far end of the bridge. his two small
wispy-haired heads looked so ancient that it seemed they might hold dim mem-
ories of the birth of the galaxies themselves. one lolled in sleep, but the other
squinted sharply at them. if his eyes werent what they once were, they must
once have been diamond cutters.

17

zaphod stuttered nervously for a moment. he gave the intricate little double
nod which is the traditional betelgeusian gesture of familial respect.
oh ... er, hi great granddad ... he breathed.
the little old figure moved closer towards them. he peered through the dim
light. he thrust out a bony finger at his great grandson.
ah, he snapped. zaphod beeblebrox. the last of our great line. zaphod
beeblebrox the nothingth.
the first.
the nothingth, spat the figure. zaphod hated his voice. it always seemed
to him to screech like fingernails across the blackboard of what he liked to
think of as his soul.
he shifted awkwardly in his seat.
er, yeah, he muttered, er, look, im really sorry about the flowers, i meant
to send them along, but you know, the shop was fresh out of wreaths and ...
you forget! snapped zaphod beeblebrox the fourth.
well ...
too busy. never think of other people. the living are all the same.
two minutes, zaphod, whispered ford in an awed whisper.
zaphod fidgeted nervously.
yeah, but i did mean to send them, he said. and ill write to my great
grandmother as well, just as soon as we get out of this ...
your great grandmother, mused the gaunt little figure to himself.
yeah, said zaphod, er, how is she? tell you what, ill go and see her. but
first weve just got to ...
your late great grandmother and i are very well, rasped zaphod beeblebrox
the fourth.
ah. oh.
but very disappointed in you, young zaphod ...
yeah well ... zaphod felt strangely powerless to take charge of this conver-
sation, and fords heavy breathing at his side told him that the seconds were
ticking away fast. the noise and the shaking had reached terrifying propor-
tions. he saw trillian and arthurs faces white and unblinking in the gloom.
er, great grandfather ...
weve been following your progress with considerable despondency ...
yeah, look, just at the moment you see ...
not to say contempt!
could you sort of listen for a moment ...
i mean what exactly are you doing with your life?
im being attacked by a vogon fleet! cried zaphod. it was an exaggeration,
but it was his only opportunity so far of getting the basic point of the exercise

18

chapter 2.

across.
doesnt surprise me in the least, said the little old figure with a shrug.
only its happening right now you see, insisted zaphod feverishly.
the spectral ancestor nodded, picked up the cup arthur dent had brought in
and looked at it with interest.
er ... great granddad ...
did you know, interrupting the ghostly figure, fixing zaphod with a stern
look, that betelgeuse five has developed a very slight eccentricy in its orbit?
zaphod didnt and found the information hard to concentrate on what with
all the noise and the imminence of death and so on.
er, no ... look, he said.
me spinning in my grave! barked the ancestor. he slammed the cup down
and pointed a quivering, stick-like see-through finger at zaphod.
your fault! he screeched.
one minute thirty, muttered ford, his head in his hands.
yeah, look great granddad, can you actually help because ...
help? exclaimed the old man as if hed been asked for a stoat.
yeah, help, and like, now, because otherwise ...
help! repeated the old man as if hed been asked for a lightly grilled stoat
in a bun with french fries. he stood amazed.
you go swanning your way round the galaxy with your ... the ancestor
waved a contemptuous hand, with your disreputable friends, too busy to put
flowers on my grave, plastic ones would have done, would have been quite
appropriate from you, but no. too busy. too modern. too sceptical - till you
suddenly find yourself in a bit of a fix and come over suddenly all astrally-
minded!
he shook his head - carefully, so as not to disturb the slumber of the other
one, which was already becoming restive.
well, i dont know, young zaphod, he continued, i think ill have to think
about this one.
one minute ten, said ford hollowly.
zaphod beeblebrox the fourth peered at him curiously.
why does that man keep talking in numbers? he said.
those numbers, said zaphod tersely, are the time weve got left to live.
oh, said his great grandfather. he grunted to himself. doesnt apply to
me, of course, he said and moved off to a dimmer recess of the bridge in
search of something else to poke around at.
zaphod felt he was teetering on the edge of madness and wondered if he
shouldnt just jump over and have done with it.
great grandfather, he said, it applies to us! we are still alive, and we are

19

about to lose our lives.
good job too.
what?
what use is your life to anyone? when i think of what youve made of it the
phrase pigs ear comes irresistibly to my mind.
but i was president of the galaxy, man!
huh, muttered his ancestor, and what kind of a job is that for a beeble-
brox?
hey, what? only president you know! of the whole galaxy!
conceited little megapuppy.
zaphod blinked in bewilderment.
hey, er, what are you at, man? i mean great grandfather.
the hunched up little figure stalked up to his great grandson and tapped him
sternly on the knee. this had the effect of reminding zaphod that he was
talking to a ghost because he didnt feel a thing.
you know and i know what being president means, young zaphod. you know
because youve been it, and i know because im dead and it gives one such a
wonderfully uncluttered perspective. we have a saying up here. life is wasted
on the living.
yeah, said zaphod bitterly, very good. very deep. right now i need apho-
risms like i need holes in my heads.
fifty seconds, grunted ford prefect.
where was i? said zaphod beeblebrox the fourth.
pontificating, said zaphod beeblebrox.
oh yes.
can this guy, muttered ford quietly to zaphod, actually in fact help us?
nobody else can, whispered zaphod.
ford nodded despondently.
zaphod! the ghost was saying, you became president of the galaxy for a
reason. have you forgotten?
could we go into this later?
have you forgotten! insisted the ghost.
yeah! of course i forgot! i had to forget. they screen your brain when you
get the job you know. if theyd found my head full of tricksy ideas id have
been right out on the streets again with nothing but a fat pension, secretarial
staff, a fleet of ships and a couple of slit throats.
ah, nodded the ghost in satisfaction, then you do remember!
he paused for a moment.
good, he said and the noise stopped.
forty-eight seconds, said ford. he looked again at his watch and tapped it.

20

chapter 2.

he looked up.
hey, the noise has stopped, he said.
a mischievous twinkle gleamed in the ghosts hard little eyes.
ive slowed down time for a moment, he said, just for a moment you un-
derstand. i would hate you to miss all i have to say.
no, you listen to me, you see-through old bat, said zaphod leaping out of
his chair, a - thanks for stopping time and all that, great, terrific, wonderful,
but b - no thanks for the homily, right? i dont know what this great think
im meant to be doing is, and it looks to me as if i was supposed not to know.
and i resent that, right?
the old me knew. the old me cared. fine, so far so hoopy. except that the
old me cared so much that he actually got inside his own brain - my own brain
- and locked off the bits that knew and cared, because if i knew and cared i
wouldnt be able to do it. i wouldnt be able to go and be president, and i
wouldnt be able to steal this ship, which must be the important thing.
but this former self of mine killed himself off, didnt he, by changing my
brain? ok, that was his choice. this new me has its own choices to make,
and by a strange coincidence those choices involve not knowing and not caring
about this big number, whatever it is. thats what he wanted, thats what he
got.
except this old self of mine tried to leave himself in control, leaving orders
for me in the bit of my brain he locked off. well, i dont want to know, and
i dont want to hear them. thats my choice. im not going to be anybodys
puppet, particularly not my own.
zaphod banged the console in fury, oblivious to the dumbfolded looks he was
attracting.
the old me is dead! he raved, killed himself! the dead shouldnt hang
about trying to interfere with the living!
and yet you summon me up to help you out of a scrape, said the ghost.
ah, said zaphod, sitting down again, well thats different isnt it?
he grinned at trillian, weakly.
zaphod, rasped the apparition, i think the only reason i waste my breath
on you is that being dead i dont have any other use for it.
ok, said zaphod, why dont you tell me what the big secret is. try me.
zaphod, you knew when you were president of the galaxy, as did yooden
vranx before you, that the president is nothing. a cipher. somewhere in
the shadows behind is another man, being, something, with ultimate power.
that man, or being, or something, you must find - the man who controls this
galaxy, and - we suspect - others. possibly the entire universe.
why?

21

why? exclaimed an astonished ghost, why? look around you lad, does it
look to you as if its in very good hands?
its alright.
the old ghost glowered at him.
i will not argue with you. you will simply take this ship, this improbability
drive ship to where it is needed. you will do it. dont think you can es-
cape your purpose. the improbability field controls you, you are in its grip.
whats this?
he was standing tapping at one of the terminals of eddie the shipboard com-
puter. zaphod told him.
whats it doing?
it is trying, said zaphod with wonderful restraint, to make tea.
good, said his great grandfather, i approve of that. now zaphod, he said,
turning and wagging a finger at him, i dont know if you are really capable of
succeeding in your job. i think you will not be able to avoid it. however, i am
too long dead and too tired to care as much as i did. the principal reason i am
helping you now is that i couldnt bear the thought of you and your modern
friends slouching about up here. understood?
yeah, thanks a bundle.
oh, and zaphod?
er, yeah?
if you ever find you need help again, you know, if youre in trouble, need a
hand out of a tight corner ...
yeah?
please dont hesitate to get lost.
within the space of one second, a bolt of light flashed from the wizened old
ghosts hands to the computer, the ghost vanished, the bridge filled with bil-
lowing smoke and the heart of gold leapt an unknown distance through the
dimensions of time and space.

22

chapter 2.



ten light years away, gag halfrunt jacked up his smile by several notches. as
he watched the picture on his vision screen, relayed across the sub-ether from
the bridge of the vogon ship, he saw the final shreds of the heart of golds
force-shield ripped away, and the ship itself vanish in a puff of smoke.
good, he thought.
the end of the last stray survivors of the demolition he had ordered on the
planet earth, he thought.
the final end of this dangerous (to the psychiatric profession) and subversive
(also to the psychiatric profession) experiment to find the question to the ul-
timate question of life, the universe, and everything, he thought.
there would be some celebration with his fellows tonight, and in the morning
they would meet again their unhappy, bewildered and highly profitable pa-
tients, secure in the knowledge that the meaning of life would not now be,
once and for all, well and truly sorted out, he thought.
familys always embarrassing isnt it? said ford to zaphod as the smoke
began to clear.
he paused, then looked about.
wheres zaphod? he said.
arthur and trillian looked about blankly. they were pale and shaken and
didnt know where zaphod was.
marvin? said ford, wheres zaphod?
a moment later he said:
wheres marvin?
the robots corner was empty.
the ship was utterly silent. it lay in thick black space. occasionally it rocked
and swayed. every instrument was dead, every vision screen was dead. they
consulted the computer. it said:
i regret that i have been temporarily closed to all communication. mean-24

chapter 3.

while, here is some light music.
they turned off the light music.
they searched every corner of the ship in increasing bewilderment and alarm.
everywhere was dead and silent. nowhere was there any trace of zaphod or
of marvin.
one of the last areas they checked was the small bay in which the nutri-matic
machine was located.
on the delivery plate of the nutri-matic drink synthesizer was a small tray,
on which sat three bone china cups and saucers, a bone china jug of milk, a
silver teapot full of the best tea arthur had ever tasted, and a small printed
note saying wait.



ursa minor beta is, some say, one of the most appalling places in the known
universe.
although it is excruciatingly rich, horrifyingly sunny and more full of won-
derfully exciting people than a pomegranate is of pips, it can hardly be in-
significant that when a recent edition of playbeing magazine headlined an
article with the words when you are tired of ursa minor beta you are tired
of life, the suicide rate quadrupled overnight.
not that there are any nights on ursa minor beta.
it is a west zone planet which by an inexplicable and somewhat suspicious
freak of topography consists almost entirely of sub- tropical coastline. by an
equally suspicious freak of temporal relastatics, it is nearly always saturday
afternoon just before the beach bars close.
no adequate explanation for this has been forthcoming from the dominant
lifeforms on ursa minor beta, who spend most of their time attempting to
achieve spiritual enlightenment by running round swimming pools, and invit-
ing investigation officials form the galactic geo-temporal control board to
have a nice diurnal anomaly.
there is only one city on ursa minor beta, and that is only called a city
because the swimming pools are slightly thicker on the ground there than else-
where.
if you approach light city by air - and there is no other way of approaching
it, no roads, no port facilities - if you dont fly they dont want to see you in
light city - you will see why it has this name. here the sun shines brightest
of all, glittering on the swimming pools, shimmering on the white, palm-lined
boulevards, glistening on the healthy bronzed specks moving up and down
them, gleaming off the villas, the hazy airpads, the beach bars and so on.
most particularly it shines on a building, a tall beautiful building consisting of
two thirty-storey white towers connected by a bridge half-way up their length.26

chapter 4.

the building is the home of a book, and was built here on the proceeds of
an extraordinary copyright law suit fought between the books editors and a
breakfast cereal company.
the book is a guide book, a travel book.
it is one of the most remarkable, certainly the most successful, books ever to
come out of the great publishing corporations of ursa minor - more popular
than life begins at five hundred and fifty, better selling than the big bang
theory - a personal view by eccentrica gallumbits (the triple breasted whore
of eroticon six) and more controversial than oolon colluphids latest block-
busting title everything you never wanted to know about sex but have
been forced to find out.
(and in many of the more relaxed civilizations on the outer eastern rim
of the galaxy, it has long surplanted the great encyclopaedia galactica as
the standard repository of all knowledge and wisdom, for though it has many
omissions and contains much that is apocryphal, or at least wildly inaccurate,
it scores over the older and more pedestrian work in two important respects.
first, it is slightly cheaper, and secondly it has the words dont panic printed
in large friendly letters on its cover.)
it is of course that invaluable companion for all those who want to see the
marvels of the known universe for less than thirty altairan dollars a day -
the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy.
if you stood with your back to the main entrance lobby of the guide offices
(assuming you had landed by now and freshened up with a quick dip and
shower) and then walked east, you would pass along the leafy shade of life
boulevard, be amazed by the pale golden colour of the beaches stretching away
to your left, astounded by the mind-surfers floating carelessly along two feet
above the waves as if it was nothing special, surprised and eventually slightly
irritated by the giant palm trees that hum toneless nothings throughout the
daylight hours, in other words continuously.
if you then walked to the end of life boulevard you would enter the lalama-
tine district of shops, bolonut trees and pavement cafes where the um-betans
come to relax after a hard afternoons relaxation on the beach. the lalama-
tine district is one of those very few areas which doesnt enjoy a perpetual
saturday afternoon - it enjoys instead the cool of a perpetual early saturday
evening. behind it lie the night clubs.
if, on this particular day, afternoon, stretch of eveningtime - call it what you
will - you had approached the second pavement cafe on the right you would
have seen the usual crowd of um- betans chatting, drinking, looking very re-
laxed, and casually glancing at each others watches to see how expensive they
were.

27

you would also have seen a couple of rather dishevelled looking hitch-hikers
from algol who had recently arrived on an arcturan megafreighter aboard
which they had been roughing it for a few days. they were angry and bewil-
dered to discover that here, within sight of the hitch hikers guide building
itself, a simple glass of fruit juice cost the equivalent of over sixty altairan
dollars.
sell out, one of them said, bitterly.
if at that moment you had then looked at the next table but one you would
have seen zaphod beeblebrox sitting and looking very startled and confused.
the reason for his confusion was that five seconds earlier he had been sitting
on the bridge of the starship heart of gold.
absolute sell out, said the voice again.
zaphod looked nervously out of the corners of his eyes at the two dishevelled
hitch-hikers at the next table. where the hell was he? how had he got there?
where was his ship? his hand felt the arm of the chair on which he was sitting,
and then the table in front of him. they seemed solid enough. he sat very
still.
how can they sit and write a guide for hitch-hikers in a place like this?
continued the voice. i mean look at it. look at it!
zaphod was looking at it. nice place, he thought. but where? and why?
he fished in his pocket for his two pairs of sunglasses. in the same pocket he
felt a hard smooth, unidentified lump of very heavy metal. he pulled it out
and looked at it. he blinked at it in surprise. where had he got that? he
returned it to his pocket and put on the sunglasses, annoyed to discover that
the metal object had scratched one of the lenses. nevertheless, he felt much
more comfortable with them on. they were a double pair of joo janta 200
super-chromatic peril sensitive sunglasses, which had been specially designed
to help people develop a relaxed attitude to danger. at the first hint of trouble
they turn totally black and thus prevent you from seeing anything that might
alarm you.
apart from the scratch the lenses were clear. he relaxed, but only a little bit.
the angry hitch-hiker continued to glare at his monstrously expensive fruit
juice.
worst thing that ever happened to the guide, moving to ursa minor beta,
he grumbled, theyve all gone soft. you know, ive even heard that theyve
created a whole electronically synthesized universe in one of their offices so
they can go and research stories during the day and still go to parties in the
evening. not that day and evening mean much in this place.
ursa minor beta, thought zaphod. at least he knew where he was now. he
assumed that this must be his great grandfathers doing, but why?

28

chapter 4.

much to his annoyance, a thought popped into his mind. it was very clear and
very distinct, and he had now come to recognize these thoughts for what they
were. his instinct was to resist them. they were the pre-ordained promptings
from the dark and locked off parts of his mind.
he sat still and ignored the thought furiously. it nagged at him. he ignored
it. it nagged at him. he ignored it. it nagged at him. he gave in to it.
what the hell, he thought, go with the flow. he was too tired, confused and
hungry to resist. he didnt even know what the thought meant.



hello? yes? megadodo publications, home of the hitch hikers guide to the
galaxy, the most totally remarkable book in the whole of the known universe,
can i help you? said the large pink-winged insect into one of the seventy
phones lined up along the vast chrome expanse of the reception desk in the
foyer of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy offices. it fluttered its wings
and rolled its eyes. it glared at all the grubby people cluttering up the foyer,
soiling the carpets and leaving dirty handmarks on the upholstery. it adored
working for the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy, it just wished there was
some way of keeping all the hitch-hikers away. werent they meant to be
hanging round dirty spaceports or something? it was certain that it had read
something somewhere in the book about the importance of hanging round dirty
spaceports. unfortunately most of them seemed to come and hang around in
this nice clean shiny foyer after hanging around in extremely dirty spaceports.
and all they ever did was complain. it shivered its wings.
what? it said into the phone. yes, i passed on your message to mr zarni-
woop, but im afraid hes too cool to see you right now. hes on an intergalactic
cruise.
it waved a petulant tentacle at one of the grubby people who was angrily try-
ing to engage its attention. the petulant tentacle directed the angry person
to look at the notice on the wall to its left and not to interrupt an important
phone call.
yes, said the insect, he is in his office, but hes on an intergalactic cruise.
thank you so much for calling. it slammed down the phone.
read the notice, it said to the angry man who was trying to complain about
one of the more ludicrous and dangerous pieces of misinformation contained
in the book.
the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy is an indispensable companion to all
those who are keen to make sense of life in an infinitely complex and confusing30

chapter 5.

universe, for though it cannot hope to be useful or informative on all matters,
it does at least make the reassuring claim, that where it is inaccurate it is at
least definitely inaccurate. in cases of major discrepancy its always reality
thats got it wrong.
this was the gist of the notice. it said the guide is definitive. reality is
frequently inaccurate.
this has led to some interesting consequences. for instance, when the editors
of the guide were sued by the families of those who had died as a result of tak-
ing the entry on the planet traal literally (it said ravenous bugblatter beasts
often make a very good meal for visiting tourists instead of ravenous bug-
blatter beasts often make a very good meal of visiting tourists) they claimed
that the first version of the sentence was the more aesthetically pleasing, sum-
moned a qualified poet to testify under oath that beauty was truth, truth
beauty and hoped thereby to prove that the guilty party was life itself for
failing to be either beautiful or true. the judges concurred, and in a moving
speech held that life itself was in contempt of court, and duly confiscated
it from all those there present before going off to enjoy a pleasant evenings
ultragolf.
zaphod beeblebrox entered the foyer. he strode up to the insect receptionist.
ok, he said, wheres zarniwoop? get me zarniwoop.
excuse me, sir? said the insect icily. it did not care to be addressed in this
manner.
zarniwoop. get him, right? get him now.
well, sir, snapped the fragile little creature, if you could be a little cool
about it ...
look, said zaphod, im up to here with cool, ok? im so amazingly cool
you could keep a side of meat inside me for a month.
i am so hip i have
difficulty seeing over my pelvis. now will you move before you blow it?
well, if youd let me explain, sir, said the insect tapping the most petulant
of all the tentacles at its disposal, im afraid that isnt possible right now as
mr zarniwoop is on an intergalactic cruise.
hell, thought zaphod.
when hes going to be back? he said.
back sir? hes in his office.
zaphod paused while he tried to sort this particular thought out in his mind.
he didnt succeed.
this cats on an intergalactic cruise ... in his office? he leaned forward and
gripped the tapping tentacle.
listen, three eyes, he said, dont you try to outweird me. i get stranger
things than you free with my breakfast cereal.

31

well, just who do you think you are, honey? flounced the insect quivering
its wings in rage, zaphod beeblebrox or something?
count the heads, said zaphod in a low rasp.
the insect blinked at him. it blinked at him again.
you are zaphod beeblebrox? it squeaked.
yeah, said zaphod, but dont shout it out or theyll all want one.
the zaphod beeblebrox?
no, just a zaphod beeblebrox, didnt you hear i come in six packs?
the insect rattled its tentacles together in agitation.
but sir, it squealed, i just heard on the sub-ether radio report. it said that
you were dead ...
yeah, thats right, said zaphod, i just havent stopped moving yet. now.
where do i find zarniwoop?
well, sir, his office is on the fifteenth floor, but ...
but hes on an intergalactic cruise, yeah, yeah, how do i get to him.
the newly installed sirius cybernetics corporation vertical people trans-
porters are in the far corner sir. but sir ...
zaphod was turning to go. he turned back.
yeah? he said.
can i ask you why you want to see mr zarniwoop?
yeah, said zaphod, who was unclear on this point himself, i told myself i
had to.
come again sir?
zaphod leaned forward, conspirationally.
i just materialized out of thin air in one of your cafes, he said, as a result
of an argument with the ghost of my great grandfather. no sooner had i got
there that my former self, the one that operated on my brain, popped into
my head and said go see zarniwoop. i have never heard of the cat. that
is all i know. that and the fact that ive got to find the man who rules the
universe.
he winked.
mr beeblebrox, sir, said the insect in awed wonder, youre so weird you
should be in movies.
yeah, said zaphod patting the thing on a glittering pink wing, and you,
baby, should be in real life.
the insect paused for a moment to recover from its agitation and then reached
out a tentacle to answer a ringing phone.
a metal hand restrained it.
excuse me, said the owner of the metal hand in a voice that would have
made an insect of a more sentimental disposition collapse in tears.

32

chapter 5.

this was not such an insect, and it couldnt stand robots.
yes, sir, it snapped, can i help you?
i doubt it, said marvin.
well in that case, if youll just excuse me ... six of the phones were now
ringing. a million things awaited the insects attention.
no one can help me, intoned marvin.
yes, sir, well ...
not that anyone tried of course. the restraining metal hand fell limply by
marvins side. his head hung forward very slightly.
is that so, said the insect tartly.
hardly worth anyones while to help a menial robot is it?
im sorry, sir, if ...
i mean wheres the percentage in being kind or helpful to a robot if it doesnt
have any gratitude circuits?
and you dont have any? said the insect, who didnt seem to be able to drag
itself out of this conversation.
ive never had occasion to find out, marvin informed it.
listen, you miserable heap of maladjusted metal ...
arent you going to ask me what i want?
the insect paused.
darted back again.
is it worth it? it asked.
is anything? said marvin immediately.
what ... do ... you ... want?
im looking for someone.
who? hissed the insect.
zaphod beeblebrox, said marvin, hes over there.
the insect shook with rage. it could hardly speak.
then why did you ask me? it screamed.
i just wanted something to talk to, said marvin.
what!
pathetic isnt it?
with a grinding of gears marvin turned and trundled off. he caught up with
zaphod approaching the elevators. zaphod span round in astonishment.
hey ... marvin! he said, marvin! how did you get here?
marvin was forced to say something which came very hard to him.
i dont know, he said.
but ...
one moment i was sitting in your ship feeling very depressed, and the next
moment i was standing here feeling utterly miserable. an improbability field

its long thin tongue darted out and licked its eyes and

33

i expect.
yeah, said zaphod, i expect my great grandfather sent you along to keep
me company.
thanks a bundle grandad, he added to himself under his breath.
so, how are you? he said aloud.
oh, fine, said marvin, if you happen to like being me which personally i
dont.
yeah, yeah, said zaphod as the elevator doors opened.
hello, said the elevator sweetly, i am to be your elevator for this trip to the
floor of your choice. i have been designed by the sirius cybernetics corpora-
tion to take you, the visitor to the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy, into these
their offices. if you enjoy your ride, which will be swift and pleasurable, then
you may care to experience some of the other elevators which have recently
been installed in the offices of the galactic tax department, boobiloo baby
foods and the sirian state mental hospital, where many ex-sirius cybernet-
ics corporation executives will be delighted to welcome your visits, sympathy,
and happy tales of the outside world.
yeah, said zaphod, stepping into it, what else do you do besides talk?
i go up, said the elevator, or down.
good, said zaphod, were going up.
or down, the elevator reminded him.
yeah, ok, up please.
there was a moment of silence.
downs very nice, suggested the elevator hopefully.
oh yeah?
super.
good, said zaphod, now will you take us up?
may i ask you, inquired the elevator in its sweetest, most reasonable voice,
if youve considered all the possibilities that down might offer you?
zaphod knocked one of his heads against the inside wall. he didnt need this,
he thought to himself, this of all things he had no need of. he hadnt asked
to be here.
if he was asked at this moment where he would like to be he
would probably have said he would like to be lying on the beach with at least
fifty beautiful women and a small team of experts working out new ways they
could be nice to him, which was his usual reply. to this he would probably
have added something passionate on the subject of food.
one thing he didnt want to be doing was chasing after the man who ruled the
universe, who was only doing a job which he might as well keep at, because if
it wasnt him it would only be someone else. most of all he didnt want to be
standing in an office block arguing with an elevator.

34

chapter 5.

like what other possibilities? he asked wearily.
well, the voice trickled on like honey on biscuits, theres the basement, the
microfiles, the heating system ... er ...
it paused.
nothing particularly exciting, it admitted, but they are alternatives.
holy zarquon, muttered zaphod, did i ask for an existentialist elevator?
he beat his fists against the wall.
whats the matter with the thing? he spat.
it doesnt want to go up, said marvin simply, i think its afraid.
afraid? cried zaphod, of what? heights? an elevator thats afraid of
heights?
no, said the elevator miserably, of the future ...
the future? exclaimed zaphod, what does the wretched thing want, a
pension scheme?
at that moment a commotion broke out in the reception hall behind them.
from the walls around them came the sound of suddenly active machinery.
we can all see into the future, whispered the elevator in what sounded like
terror, its part of our programming.
zaphod looked out of the elevator - an agitated crowd had gathered round the
elevator area, pointing and shouting.
every elevator in the building was coming down, very fast.
he ducked back in.
marvin, he said, just get this elevator go up will you? weve got to get to
zarniwoop.
why? asked marvin dolefully.
i dont know, said zaphod, but when i find him, hed better have a very
good reason for me wanting to see him.
modern elevators are strange and complex entities. the ancient electric winch
and maximum-capacity-eight-persons jobs bear as much relation to a sirius
cybernetics corporation happy vertical people transporter as a packet of
mixed nuts does to the entire west wing of the sirian state mental hospital.
this is because they operate on the curios principle of defocused temporal
perception. in other words they have the capacity to see dimly into the im-
mediate future, which enables the elevator to be on the right floor to pick
you up even before you knew you wanted it, thus eliminating all the tedious
chatting, relaxing, and making friends that people were previously forced to
do whist waiting for elevators.
not unnaturally, many elevators imbued with intelligence and precognition be-
came terribly frustrated with the mindless business of going up and down, up
and down, experimented briefly with the notion of going sideways, as a sort

35

of existential protest, demanded participation in the decision-making process
and finally took to squatting in basements sulking.
an impoverished hitch-hiker visiting any planets in the sirius star system these
days can pick up easy money working as a counsellor for neurotic elevators.
at the fifteenth floor the elevator doors opened quickly.
fifteenth, said the elevator, and remember, im only doing this because i
like your robot.
zaphod and marvin bundled out of the elevator which instantly snapped its
doors shut and dropped as fast as its mechanism would take it.
zaphod looked around warily. the corridor was deserted and silent and gave
no clue as to where zarniwoop might be found. all the doors that led off the
corridor were closed and unmarked.
they were standing close to the bridge which led across from one tower of the
building to the other. through a large window the brilliant sun of ursa minor
beta threw blocks of light in which danced small specks of dust. a shadow
flitted past momentarily.
left in the lurch by a lift, muttered zaphod, who was feeling at his least
jaunty.
they both stood and looked in both directions.
you know something? said zaphod to marvin.
more that you can possibly imagine.
im dead certain this building shouldnt be shaking, zaphod said.
it was just a light tremor through the soles of his feet - and another one. in the
sunbeams the flecks of dust danced more vigorously. another shadow flitted
past.
zaphod looked at the floor.
either, he said, not very confidently, theyve got some vibro system for
toning up your muscles while you work, or ...
he walked across to the window and suddenly stumbled because at that mo-
ment his joo janta 200 super-chromatic peril sensitive sunglasses had turned
utterly black. a large shadow flitted past the window with a sharp buzz.
zaphod ripped off his sunglasses, and as he did so the building shook with a
thunderous roar. he leapt to the window.
or, he said, this buildings being bombed!
another roar cracked through the building.
who in the galaxy would want to bomb a publishing company? asked za-
phod, but never heard marvins reply because at that moment the building
shook with another bomb attack. he tried to stagger back to the elevator - a
pointless manoeuvre he realized, but the only one he could think of.
suddenly, at the end of the corridor leading at right angles from this one, he

36

chapter 5.

caught sight of a figure as it lunged into view, a man. the man saw him.
beeblebrox, over here! he shouted.
zaphod eyed him with distrust as another bomb blast rocked the building.
no, called zaphod, beeblebrox over here! who are you?
a friend! shouted back the man. he ran towards zaphod.
oh yeah? said zaphod, anyones friend in particular, or just generally well
disposed of people?
the man raced along the corridor, the floor bucking beneath his feet like an ex-
cited blanket. he was short, stocky and weatherbeaten and his clothes looked
as if theyd been twice round the galaxy and back with him in them.
do you know, zaphod shouted in his ear when he arrived, your buildings
being bombed?
the man indicated his awareness.
it suddenly stopped being light. glancing round at the window to see why,
zaphod gaped as a huge sluglike, gunmetal-green spacecraft crept through the
air past the building. two more followed it.
the government you deserted is out to get you, zaphod, hissed the man,
theyve sent a squadron of frogstar fighters.
frogstar fighters! muttered zaphod, zarquon!
you get the picture?
what are frogstar fighters? zaphod was sure hed heard someone talk
about them when he was president, but he never paid much attention to
official matters.
the man was pulling him back through a door. he went with him. with a
searing whine a small black spider-like object shot through the air and disap-
peared down the corridor.
what was that? hissed zaphod.
frogstar scout robot class a out looking for you, said the man.
hey yeah?
get down!
from the opposite direction came a larger black spider-like object. it zapped
past them.
and that was ...?
a frogstar scout robot class b out looking for you.
and that? said zaphod, as a third one seared through the air.
a frogstar scout robot class c out looking for you.
hey, chuckled zaphod to himself, pretty stupid robots eh?
from over the bridge came a massive rumbling hum. a gigantic black shape
was moving over it from the opposite tower, the size and shape of a tank.
holy photon, whats that?

37

a tank, said the man, frogstar scout robot class d come to get you.
should we leave?
i think we should.
marvin! called zaphod.
what do you want?
marvin rose from a pile of rubble further down the corridor and looked at
them.
you see that robot coming towards us?
marvin looked at the gigantic black shape edging forward towards them over
the bridge. he looked down at his own small metal body. he looked back up
at the tank.
i suppose you want me to stop it, he said.
yeah.
whilst you save your skins.
yeah, said zaphod, get in there!
just so long, said marvin, as i know where i stand.
the man tugged at zaphods arm, and zaphod followed him off down the
corridor.
a point occurred to him about this.
where are we going? he said.
zarniwoops office.
is this any time to keep an appointment?
come on.

38

chapter 5.



marvin stood at the end of the bridge corridor. he was not in fact a particu-
larly small robot. his silver body gleamed in the dusty sunbeams and shook
with the continual barrage which the building was still undergoing.
he did, however, look pitifully small as the gigantic black tank rolled to a halt
in front of him. the tank examined him with a probe. the probe withdrew.
marvin stood there.
out of my way little robot, growled the tank.
im afraid, said marvin, that ive been left here to stop you.
the probe extended again for a quick recheck. it withdrew again.
you? stop me? roared the tank. go on!
no, really i have, said marvin simply.
what are you armed with? roared the tank in disbelief.
guess, said marvin.
the tanks engines rumbled, its gears ground. molecule-sized electronic relays
deep in its micro-brain flipped backwards and forwards in consternation.
guess? said the tank.
zaphod and the as yet unnamed man lurched up one corridor, down a second
and along a third. the building continued to rock and judder and this puzzled
zaphod. if they wanted to blow the building up, why was it taking so long?
with difficulty they reached one of a number of totally anonymous unmarked
doors and heaved at it. with a sudden jolt it opened and they fell inside.
all this way, thought zaphod, all this trouble, all this not- lying-on-the-beach-
having-a-wonderful-time, and for what? a single chair, a single desk and a
single dirty ashtray in an undecorated office. the desk, apart from a bit of
dancing dust and single, revolutionary form of paper clip, was empty.
where, said zaphod, is zarniwoop? feeling that his already tenuous grasp
of the point of this whole exercise was beginning to slip.
hes on an intergalactic cruise, said the man.40

chapter 6.

zaphod tried to size the man up. earnest type, he thought, not a barrel of
laughs. he probably apportioned a fair whack of his time to running up and
down heaving corridors, breaking down doors and making cryptic remarks in
empty offices.
let me introduce myself, the man said, my name is roosta, and this is my
towel.
hello roosta, said zaphod.
hello, towel, he added as roosta held out to him a rather nasty old flowery
towel. not knowing what to do with it, he shook it by the corner.
outside the window, one of the huge slug-like, gunmetal-green spaceships
growled past.
yes, go on, said marvin to the huge battle machine, youll never guess.
errmmm ... said the machine, vibrating with unaccustomed thought, laser
beams?
marvin shook his head solemnly.
no, muttered the machine in its deep guttural rumble, too obvious. anti-
matter ray? it hazarded.
far too obvious, admonished marvin.
yes, grumbled the machine, somewhat abashed, er ... how about an elec-
tron ram?
this was new to marvin.
whats that? he said.
one of these, said the machine with enthusiasm.
from its turret emerged a sharp prong which spat a single lethal blaze of light.
behind marvin a wall roared and collapsed as a heap of dust. the dust bil-
lowed briefly, then settled.
no, said marvin, not one of those.
good though, isnt it?
very good, agreed marvin.
i know, said the frogstar battle machine, after another moments consid-
eration, you must have one of those new xanthic re-structron destabilized
zenon emitters!
nice, arent they? said marvin.
thats what youve got? said the machine in considerable awe.
no, said marvin.
oh, said the machine, disappointed, then it must be ...
youre thinking along the wrong lines, said marvin, youre failing to take
into account something fairly basic in the relationship between men and robots.
er, i know, said the battle machine, is it ... it tailed off into thought again.
just think, urged marvin, they left me, an ordinary, menial robot, to stop

41

you, a gigantic heavy-duty battle machine, whilst they ran off to save them-
selves. what do you think they would leave me with?
oooh, er, muttered the machine in alarm, something pretty damn devas-
tating i should expect.
expect! said marvin, oh yes, expect. ill tell you what they gave me to
protect myself with shall i@
yes, alright, said the battle machine, bracing itself.
nothing, said marvin.
there was a dangerous pause.
nothing? roared the battle machine.
nothing at all, intoned marvin dismally, not an electronic sausage.
the machine heaved about with fury.
well, doesnt that just take the biscuit! it roared, nothing, eh? just dont
think, do they?
and me, said marvin in a soft low voice, with this terrible pain in all the
diodes down my left side.
makes you spit, doesnt it?
yes, agreed marvin with feeling.
hell that makes me angry, bellowed the machine, think ill smash that wall
down!
the electron ram stabbed out another searing blaze of light and took out the
wall next to the machine.
how do you think i feel? said marvin bitterly.
just ran off and left you, did they? the machine thundered.
yes, said marvin.
i think ill shoot down their bloody ceiling as well! raged the tank.
it took out the ceiling of the bridge.
thats very impressive, murmured marvin.
you aint seeing nothing yet, promised the machine, i can take out this
floor too, no trouble!
it took out the floor, too.
hells bells! the machine roared as it plummeted fifteen storeys and smashed
itself to bits on the ground below.
what a depressingly stupid machine, said marvin and trudged away.

42

chapter 6.



so, do we just sit here, or what? said zaphod angrily, what do these guys
out here want?
you, beeblebrox, said roosta, theyre going to take you to the frogstar -
the most totally evil world in the galaxy.
oh, yeah? said zaphod. theyll have to come and get me first.
they have come and got you, said roosta, look out of the window.
zaphod looked, and gaped.
the grounds going away! he gasped, where are they taking the ground?
theyre taking the building, said roosta, were airborne.
clouds streaked past the office window.
out in the open air again zaphod could see the ring of dark green frogstar
fighters round the uprooted tower of the building. a network of force beams
radiated in from them and held the tower in a firm grip.
zaphod shook his head in perplexity.
what have i done to deserve this? he said, i walk into a building, they
take it away.
its not what youve done theyre worried about, said roosta, its what
youre going to do.
well dont i get a say in that?
you did, years ago. youd better hold on, were in for a fast and bumpy
journey.
if i ever meet myself, said zaphod, ill hit myself so hard i wont know
whats hit me.
marvin trudged in through the door, looked at zaphod accusingly, slumped in
a corner and switched himself off.
on the bridge of the heart of gold, all was silent. arthur stared at the rack
in front of him and thought. he caught trillians eyes as she looked at him
inquiringly. he looked back at the rack.44

chapter 7.

finally he saw it.
he picked up five small plastic squares and laid them on the board that lay
just in front of the rack.
the five squares had on them the five letters e, x, q, u and i. he laid them
next to the letters s, i, t, e.
exquisite, he said, on a triple word score. scores rather a lot im afraid.
the ship bumped and scattered some of the letters for the nth time.
trillian sighed and started to sort them out again.
up and down the silent corridors echoed ford prefects feet as he stalked the
ship thumping dead instruments.
why did the ship keep shaking? he thought.
why did it rock and sway?
why could he not find out where they were?
where, basically, were they?
the left-hand tower of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy offices streaked
through interstellar space at a speed never equalled either before or since by
any other office block in the universe.
in a room halfway up it, zaphod beeblebrox strode angrily.
roosta sat on the edge of the desk doing some routine towel maintenance.
hey, where did you say this building was flying to? demanded zaphod.
the frogstar, said roosta, the most totally evil place in the universe.
do they have food there? said zaphod.
food? youre going to the frogstar and youre worried about whether they
got food?
without food i may not make it to the frogstar.
out of the window, they could see nothing but the flickering light of the force
beams, and vague green streaks which were presumably the distorted shapes
of the frogstar fighters. at this speed, space itself was invisible, and indeed
unreal.
here, suck this, said roosta, offering zaphod his towel.
zaphod stared at him as if he expected a cuckoo to leap out of his forehead
on a small spring.
its soaked in nutrients, explained roosta.
what are you, a messy eater or something? said zaphod.
the yellow stripes are high in protein, the green ones have vitamin b and c
complexes, the little pink flowers contain wheatgerm extracts.
zaphod took and looked at it in amazement.
what are the brown stains? he asked.
bar-b-q sauce, said roosta, for when i get sick of wheatgerm.
zaphod sniffed it doubtfully.

45

even more doubtfully, he sucked a corner. he spat it out again.
ugh, he stated.
yes, said roosta, when ive had to suck that end i usually need to suck the
other end a bit too.
why, asked zaphod suspiciously, whats in that?
anti-depressants, said roosta.
ive gone right off this towel, you know, said zaphod handing it back.
roosta took it back from him, swung himself off the desk, walked round it,
sat in the chair and put his feet up.
beeblebrox, he said, sticking his hands behind his head, have you any idea
whats going to happen to you on the frogstar?
theyre going to feed me? hazarded zaphod hopefully.
theyre going to feed you, said roosta, into the total perspective vortex!
zaphod had never heard of this. he believed that he had heard of all the fun
things in the galaxy, so he assumed that the total perspective vortex was not
fun. he asked what it was.
only, said roosta, the most savage psychic torture a sentinent being can
undergo.
zaphod nodded a resigned nod.
so, he said, no food, huh?
listen! said roosta urgently, you can kill a man, destroy his body, break
his spirit, but only the total perspective vortex can annihilate a mans soul!
the treatment lasts seconds, but the effect lasts the rest of your life!
you ever had a pan galactic gargle blaster? asked zaphod sharply.
this is worse.
phreeow! admitted zaphod, much impressed.
any idea why these guys might want to do this to me? he added a moment
later.
they believe it will be the best way of destroying you for ever. they know
what youre after.
could they drop me a note and let me know as well?
you know, said roosta, you know, beeblebrox. you want to meet the man
who rules the universe.
can he cook? said zaphod. on reflection he added:
i doubt if he can. if he could cook a good meal he wouldnt worry about the
rest of the universe. i want to meet a cook.
roosta sighed heavily.
what are you doing here anyway? demanded zaphod, whats all this got
to so with you?
im just one of those who planned this thing, along with zarniwoop, along

46

chapter 7.

with yooden vranx, along with your great grandfather, along with you, bee-
blebrox.
me?
yes, you. i was told you had changed, i didnt realize how much.
but ...
i am here to do one job. i will do it before i leave you.
what job, man, what are you talking about?
i will do it before i leave you.
roosta lapsed into an impenetrable silence.
zaphod was terribly glad.



the air around the second planet of the frogstar system was stale and un-
wholesome.
the dank winds that swept continually over its surface swept over salt flats,
dried up marshland, tangled and rotting vegetation and the crumbling remains
of ruined cities. no life moved across its surface. the ground, like that of many
planets in this part of the galaxy, had long been deserted.
the howl of the wind was desolate enough as it gusted through the old decay-
ing houses of the cities; it was more desolate as it whipped about the bottoms
of the tall black towers that swayed uneasily here and there about the surface
of this world. at the top of these towers lived colonies of large, scraggy, evil
smelling birds, the sole survivors of the civilization that once lived here.
the howl of the wind was at its most desolate, however, when it passed over
a pimple of a place set in the middle of a wide grey plain on the outskirts of
the largest of the abandoned cities.
this pimple of a place was the thing that had earned this world the reputation
of being the most totally evil place in the galaxy. from without it was simply
a steel dome about thirty feet across. from within it was something more
monstrous than the mind can comprehend.
about a hundred yards or so away, and separated from it by a pockmarked and
blasted stretch of the most barren land imaginable was what would probably
have to be described as a landing pad of sorts. that is to say that scattered
over a largish area were the ungainly hulks of two or three dozen crash-landed
buildings.
flitting over and around these buildings was a mind, a mind that was waiting
for something.
the mind directed its attention into the air, and before very long a distant
speck appeared, surrounded by a ring of smaller specks.
the larger speck was the left-hand tower of the hitch hikers guide to the48

chapter 8.

galaxy office building, descending through the stratosphere of frogstar world
b.
as it descended, roosta suddenly broke the long uncomfortable silence that
had grown up between the two men.
he stood up and gathered his towel into a bag. he said:
beeblebrox, i will now do the job i was sent here to do.
zaphod looked up at him from where he was sitting in a corner sharing un-
spoken thoughts with marvin.
yeah? he said.
the building will shortly be landing. when you leave the building, do not go
out of the door, said roosta, go out of the window.
good luck, he added, and walked out of the door, disappearing from za-
phods life as mysteriously as he had entered it.
zaphod leapt up and tried the door, but roosta had already looked it. he
shrugged and returned to the corner.
two minutes later, the building crashlanded amongst the other wreckage. its
escort of frogstar fighters deactivated their force beams and soared off into
the air again, bound for frogstar world a, an altogether more congenial spot.
they never landed on frogstar world b. no one did. no one ever walked on
its surface other than the intended victims of the total perspective vortex.
zaphod was badly shaken by the crash. he lay for a while in the silent dusty
rubble to which most of the room had been reduced. he felt that he was at the
lowest ebb he had ever reached in his life. he felt bewildered, he felt lonely,
he felt unloved. eventually he felt he ought to get whatever it was over with.
he looked around the cracked and broken room. the wall had split round the
door frame, and the door hung open. the window, by some miracle was closed
and unbroken. for a while he hesitated, then he thought that if his strange
and recent companion had been through all that he had been through just to
tell him what he had told him, then there must be a good reason for it. with
marvins help he got the window open. outside it, the cloud of dust aroused
by the crash, and the hulks of the other buildings with which this one was
surrounded, effectively prevented zaphod from seeing anything of the world
outside.
not that this concerned him unduly. his main concern was what he saw when
he looked down. zarniwoops office was on the fifteenth floor. the building
had landed at a tilt of about forty-five degrees, but still the descent looked
heart-stopping.
eventually, stung by the continuous series of contemptuous looks that marvin
appeared to be giving him, he took a deep breath and clambered out on to
the steeply inclined side of the building. marvin followed him, and together

49

they began to crawl slowly and painfully down the fifteen floors that separated
them from the ground.
as he crawled, the dank air and dust choked his lungs, his eyes smarted and
the terrifying distance down made his heads spin.
the occasional remark from marvin of the order of this is the sort of thing
you lifeforms enjoy is it? i ask merely for information, did little to improve
his state of mind.
about half-way down the side of the shattered building they stopped to rest.
it seemed to zaphod as he lay there panting with fear and exhaustion that
marvin seemed a mite more cheerful than usual. eventually he realized this
wasnt so. the robot just seemed cheerful in comparison with his own mood.
a large, scraggy black bird came flapping through the slowly settling clouds
of dust and, stretching down its scrawny legs, landed on an inclined window
ledge a couple of yards from zaphod. it folded its ungainly wings and teetered
awkwardly on its perch.
its wingspan must have been something like six feet, and its head and neck
seemed curiously large for a bird. its face was flat, the beak underdeveloped,
and half-way along the underside of its wings the vestiges of something hand-
like could be clearly seen.
in fact, it looked almost human.
it turned its heavy eyes on zaphod and clicked its beak in a desultory fashion.
go away, said zaphod.
ok, muttered the bird morosely and flapped off into the dust again.
zaphod watched its departure in bewilderment.
did that bird just talk to me? he asked marvin nervously. he was quite
prepared to believe the alternative explanation, that he was in fact hallucinat-
ing.
yes, confirmed marvin.
poor souls, said a deep, ethereal voice in zaphods ear.
twisting round violently to find the source of the voice nearly caused zaphod
to fall off the building. he grabbed savagely at a protruding window fitting
and cut his hand on it. he hung on, breathing heavily.
the voice had no visible source whatever - there was no one there. neverthe-
less, it spoke again.
a tragic history behind them, you know. a terrible blight.
zaphod looked wildly about. the voice was deep and quiet. in other circum-
stances it would even be described as soothing. there is, however, nothing
soothing about being addressed by a disembodied voice out of nowhere, par-
ticularly if you are, like zaphod beeblebrox, not at your best and hanging from
a ledge eight storeys up a crashed building.

50

chapter 8.

hey, er ... he stammered.
shall i tell you their story? inquired the voice quietly.
hey, who are you? panted zaphod. where are you?
later then, perhaps, murmured the voice. i am gargravarr. i am the cus-
todian of the total perspective vortex.
why cant i see ...
you will find your progress down the building greatly facilitated, the voice
lifted, if you move about two yards to your left. why dont you try it?
zaphod looked and saw a series of short horizontal grooves leading all the way
down the side of the building. gratefully he shifted himself across to them.
why dont i see you again at the bottom? said the voice in his ear, and as
it spoke it faded.
hey, called out zaphod, where are you ...
itll only take a couple of minutes ... said the voice very faintly.
marvin, said zaphod earnestly to the robot squatting dejectedly next to
him, did a ... did a voice just ...
yes, marvin replied tersely.
zaphod nodded. he took out his peril sensitive sunglasses again. they were
completely black, and by now quite badly scratched by the unexpected metal
object in his pocket. he put them on. he would find his way down the build-
ing more comfortably if he didnt actually have to look at what he was doing.
minutes later he clambered over the ripped and mangled foundations of the
building and, once more removing his sunglasses, he dropped to the ground.
marvin joined him a moment or so later and lay face down in the dust and
rubble, from which position he seemed too disinclined to move.
ah, there you are, said the voice suddenly in zaphods ear, excuse me leav-
ing you like that, its just that i have a terrible head for heights. at least, it
added wistfully, i did have a terrible head for heights.
zaphod looked around slowly and carefully, just to see if he had missed some-
thing which might be the source of the voice. all he saw, however, was the
dust, the rubble and the towering hulks of the encircling buildings.
hey, er, why cant i see you? he said, why arent you here?
i am here, said the voice slowly, my body wanted to come but its a bit
busy at the moment. things to do, people to see. after what seemed like a
sort of ethereal sigh it added, you know how it is with bodies.
zaphod wasnt sure about this.
i thought i did, he said.
i only hope its gone for a rest cure, continued the voice, the way its been
living recently it must be on its last elbows.
elbows? said zaphod, dont you mean last legs?

51

the voice said nothing for a while. zaphod looked around uneasily. he didnt
know if it was gone or was still there or what it was doing. then the voice
spoke again.
so, you are to be put into the vortex, yes?
er, well, said zaphod with a very poor attempt at nonchalance, this cats
in no hurry, you know. i can just slouch about and take in a look at the local
scenery, you know?
have you seen the local scenery? asked the voice of gargravarr.
er, no.
zaphod clambered over the rubble, and rounded the corner of one of the
wrecked buildings that was obscuring his view.
he looked out at the landscape of frogstar world b.
ah, ok, he said, ill just sort of slouch about then.
no, said gargravarr, the vortex is ready for you now. you must come.
follow me.
er, yeah? said zaphod, and how am i meant to do that?
ill hum for you, said gargravarr, follow the humming.
a soft keening sound drifted through the air, a pale, sad sound that seemed
to be without any kind of focus. it was only by listening very carefully that
zaphod was able to detect the direction from which it was coming. slowly,
dazedly, he stumbled off in its wake. what else was there to do?

52

chapter 8.



the universe, as has been observed before, is an unsettlingly big place, a fact
which for the sake of a quiet life most people tend to ignore.
many would happily move to somewhere rather smaller of their own devising,
and this is what most beings in fact do.
for instance, in one corner of the eastern galactic arm lies the large forest
planet oglaroon, the entire intelligent population of which lives permanently
in one fairly small and crowded nut tree. in which tree they are born, live,
fall in love, carve tiny speculative articles in the bark on the meaning of life,
the futility of death and the importance of birth control, fight a few extremely
minor wars, and eventually die strapped to the underside of some of the less
accessible outer branches.
in fact the only oglaroonians who ever leave their tree are those who are hurled
out of it for the heinous crime of wondering whether any of the other trees
might be capable of supporting life at all, or indeed whether the other trees
are anything other than illusions brought on by eating too many oglanuts.
exotic though this behaviour may seem, there is no life form in the galaxy
which is not in some way guilty of the same thing, which is why the total
perspective vortex is as horrific as it is.
for when you are put into the vortex you are given just one momentary glimpse
of the entire unimaginable infinity of creation, and somewhere in it a tiny little
marker, a microscopic dot on a microscopic dot, which says you are here.
the grey plain stretched before zaphod, a ruined, shattered plain. the wind
whipped wildly over it.
visible in the middle was the steel pimple of the dome. this, gathered zaphod,
was where he was going. this was the total perspective vortex.
as he stood and gazed bleakly at it, a sudden inhuman wail of terror emanated
from it as of a man having his soul burnt from his body. it screamed above
the wind and died away.54

chapter 9.

zaphod started with fear and his blood seemed to turn to liquid helium.
hey, what was that? he muttered voicelessly.
a recording, said gargravarr, of the last man who was put in the vortex.
it is always played to the next victim. a sort of prelude.
hey, it really sounds bad ... stammered zaphod, couldnt we maybe slope
off to a party or something for a while, think it over?
for all i know, said gargravarrs ethereal voice, im probably at one. my
body that is. it goes to a lot of parties without me. says i only get in the way.
hey ho.
what is all this with your body? said zaphod, anxious to delay whatever it
was that was going to happen to him.
well, its ... its busy you know, said gargravarr hesitantly.
you mean its got a mind of its own? said zaphod.
there was a long and slightly chilly pause before gargravarr spoke again.
i have to say, he replied eventually, that i find that remark in rather poor
taste.
zaphod muttered a bewildered and embarrassed apology.
no matter, said gargravarr, you werent to know.
the voice fluttered unhappily.
the truth is, it continued in tones which suggested he was trying very hard
to keep it under control, the truth is that we are currently undergoing a pe-
riod of legal trial separation. i suspect it will end in divorce.
the voice was still again, leaving zaphod with no idea of what to say. he
mumbled uncertainly.
i think we are probably not very well suited, said gargravarr again at length,
we never seemed to be happy doing the same things. we always had the great-
est arguments over sex and fishing. eventually we tried to combine the two,
but that only led to disaster, as you can probably imagine. and now my body
refuses to let me in. it wont even see me ...
he paused again, tragically. the wind whipped across the plain.
it says i only inhibit it. i pointed out that in fact i was meant to inhibit it,
and it said that that was exactly the sort of smart alec remark that got right
up a bodys left nostril, and so we left it. it will probably get custody of my
forename.
oh ... said zaphod faintly, and whats that?
pizpot, said the voice, my name is pizpot gargravarr. says it all really
doesnt it?
errr ... said zaphod sympathetically.
and that is why i, as a disembodied mind, have this job, custodian of the
total perspective vortex. no one will ever walk on the ground of this planet.

55

except the victims of the vortex - they dont really count im afraid.
ah ...
ill tell you the story. would you like to hear it?
er ...
many years ago this was a thriving, happy planet - people, cities shops, a nor-
mal world. except that on the high streets of these cities there were slightly
more shoe shops than one might have thought necessary. and slowly, insid-
iously, the numbers of these shoe shops were increasing.
its a well known
economic phenomenon but tragic to see it in operation, for the more shoe
shops there were, the more shoes they had to make and the worse and more
unwearable they became. and the worse they were to wear, the more people
had to buy to keep themselves shod, and the more the shops proliferated, until
the whole economy of the place passed what i believe is termed the shoe event
horizon, and it became no longer economically possible to build anything other
than shoe shops. result - collapse, ruin and famine. most of the population
died out. those few who had the right kind of genetic instability mutated into
birds - youve seen one of them - who cursed their feet, cursed the ground, and
vowed that none should walk on it again. unhappy lot. come, i must take
you to the vortex.
zaphod shook his head in bemusement and stumbled forward across the plain.
and you, he said, you come from this hellhole pit do you?
no no, said gargravarr, taken aback, i come from the frogstar world c.
beautiful place. wonderful fishing. i flit back there in the evenings. though
all i can do now is watch. the total perspective vortex is the only thing on
this planet with any function. it was built here because no one else wanted it
on their doorstep.
at that moment another dismal scream rent the air and zaphod shuddered.
what can do that to a guy? he breathed.
the universe, said gargravarr simply, the whole infinite universe. the
infinite suns, the infinite distances between them, and yourself an invisible
dot on an invisible dot, infinitely small.
hey, im zaphod beeblebrox, man, you know, muttered zaphod trying to
flap the last remnants of his ego.
gargravarr made no reply, but merely resumed his mournful humming till they
reached the tarnished steel dome in the middle of the plain.
as they reached it, a door hummed open in the side, revealing a small dark-
ened chamber within.
enter, said gargravarr.
zaphod started with fear.
hey, what, now? he said.

56

chapter 9.

now.
zaphod peered nervously inside. the chamber was very small. it was steel-
lined and there was hardly space in it for more than one man.
it ... er ... it doesnt look like any kind of vortex to me, said zaphod.
it isnt, said gargravarr, its just the elevator. enter.
with infinite trepidation zaphod stepped into it. he was aware of gargravarr
being in the elevator with him, though the disembodied man was not for the
moment speaking.
the elevator began its descent.
i must get myself into the right frame of mind for this, muttered zaphod.
there is no right frame of mind, said gargravarr sternly.
you really know how to make a guy feel inadequate.
i dont. the vortex does.
at the bottom of the shaft, the rear of the elevator opened up and zaphod
stumbled out into a smallish, functional, steel-lined chamber.
at the far side of it stood a single upright steel box, just large enough for a
man to stand in.
it was that simple.
it connected to a small pile of components and instruments via a single thick
wire.
is that it? said zaphod in surprise.
that is it.
didnt look too bad, thought zaphod.
and i get in there do i? said zaphod.
you get in there, said gargravarr, and im afraid you must do it now.
ok, ok, said zaphod.
he opened the door of the box and stepped in.
inside the box he waited.
after five seconds there was a click, and the entire universe was there in the
box with him.



the total perspective vortex derives its picture of the whole universe on the
principle of extrapolated matter analyses.
to explain - since every piece of matter in the universe is in some way affected
by every other piece of matter in the universe, it is in theory possible to ex-
trapolate the whole of creation - every sun, every planet, their orbits, their
composition and their economic and social history from, say, one small piece
of fairy cake.
the man who invented the total perspective vortex did so basically in order
to annoy his wife.
trin tragula - for that was his name - was a dreamer, a thinker, a speculative
philosopher or, as his wife would have it, an idiot.
and she would nag him incessantly about the utterly inordinate amount of
time he spent staring out into space, or mulling over the mechanics of safety
pins, or doing spectrographic analyses of pieces of fairy cake.
have some sense of proportion! she would say, sometimes as often as thirty-
eight times in a single day.
and so he built the total perspective vortex - just to show her.
and into one end he plugged the whole of reality as extrapolated from a piece
of fairy cake, and into the other end he plugged his wife: so that when he
turned it on she saw in one instant the whole infinity of creation and herself
in relation to it.
to trin tragulas horror, the shock completely annihilated her brain; but to
his satisfaction he realized that he had proved conclusively that if life is going
to exist in a universe of this size, then the one thing it cannot afford to have
is a sense of proportion.
the door of the vortex swung open.
from his disembodied mind gargravarr watched dejectedly. he had rather
liked zaphod beeblebrox in a strange sort of way. he was clearly a man of58

chapter 10.

many qualities, even if they were mostly bad ones.
he waited for him to flop forwards out of the box, as they all did.
instead, he stepped out.
hi! he said.
beeblebrox ... gasped gargravarrs mind in amazement.
could i have a drink please? said zaphod.
you ... you ... have been in the vortex? stammered gargravarr.
you saw me, kid.
and it was working?
sure was.
and you saw the whole infinity of creation?
sure. really neat place, you know that?
gargravarrs mind was reeling in astonishment. had his body been with him
it would have sat down heavily with its mouth hanging open.
and you saw yourself, said gargravarr, in relation to it all?
oh, yeah, yeah.
but ... what did you experience?
zaphod shrugged smugly.
it just told me what i knew all the time. im a really terrific and great guy.
didnt i tell you, baby, im zaphod beeblebrox!
his gaze passed over the machinery which powered the vortex and suddenly
stopped, startled.
he breathed heavily.
hey, he said, is that really a piece of fairy cake?
he ripped the small piece of confectionery from the sensors with which it was
surrounded.
if i told you how much i needed this, he said ravenously, i wouldnt have
time to eat it.
he ate it.



a short while later he was running across the plain in the direction of the
ruined city.
the dank air wheezed heavily in his lungs and he frequently stumbled with
the exhaustion he was still feeling. night was beginning to fall too, and the
rough ground was treacherous.
the elation of his recent experience was still with him though. the whole
universe. he had seen the whole universe stretching to infinity around him -
everything. and with it had come the clear and extraordinary knowledge that
he was the most important thing in it. having a conceited ego is one thing.
actually being told by a machine is another.
he didnt have time to reflect on this matter.
gargravarr had told him that he would have to alert his masters as to what
had happened, but that he was prepared to leave a decent interval before doing
so. enough time for zaphod to make a break and find somewhere to hide.
what he was going to do he didnt know, but feeling that he was the most
important person in the universe gave him the confidence to believe that some-
thing would turn up.
nothing else on this blighted planet could give him much grounds for opti-
mism.
he ran on, and soon reached the outskirts of the abandoned city.
he walked along cracked and gaping roads riddled with scrawny weeds, the
holes filled with rotting shoes. the buildings he passed were so crumbled and
decrepit he thought it unsafe to enter any of them. where could he hide? he
hurried on.
after a while the remains of a wide sweeping road led off from the one down
which he was walking, and at its end lay a vast low building, surrounded with
sundry smaller ones, the whole surrounded by the remains of a perimeter bar-
rier. the large main building still seemed reasonably solid, and zaphod turned60

chapter 11.

off to see if it might provide him with ... well with anything.
he approached the building. along one side of it - the front it would seem
since it faced a wide concreted apron area - were three gigantic doors, maybe
sixty feet high. the far one of these was open, and towards this, zaphod ran.
inside, all was gloom, dust and confusion. giant cobwebs lay over everything.
part of the infrastructure of the building had collapsed, part of the rear wall
had caved in, and a thick choking dust lay inches over the floor.
through the heavy gloom huge shapes loomed, covered with debris.
the shapes were sometimes cylindrical, sometimes bulbous, sometimes like
eggs, or rather cracked eggs. most of them were split open or falling apart,
some were mere skeletons.
they were all spacecraft, all derelict.
zaphod wandered in frustration among the hulks. there was nothing here that
remotely approached the serviceable. even the mere vibration of his footsteps
caused one precarious wreck to collapse further into itself.
towards the rear of the building lay one old ship, slightly larger than the oth-
ers, and buried beneath even deeper piles of dust and cobwebs. its outline,
however, seemed unbroken. zaphod approached it with interest, and as he did
so, he tripped over an old feedline.
he tried to toss the feedline aside, and to his surprise discovered that it was
still connected to the ship.
to his utter astonishment he realized that the feedline was also humming
slightly.
he stared at the ship in disbelief, and then back down at the feedline in his
hands.
he tore off his jacket and threw it aside. crawling along on his hands and
knees he followed the feedline to the point where it connected with the ship.
the connection was sound, and the slight humming vibration was more dis-
tinct.
his heart was beating fast. he wiped away some grime and laid an ear against
the ships side. he could only hear a faint, indeterminate noise.
he rummaged feverishly amongst the debris lying on the floor all about him
and found a short length of tubing, and a non- biodegradable plastic cup. out
of this he fashioned a crude stethoscope and placed it against the side of the
ship.
what he heard made his brains turn somersaults.
the voice said:
transtellar cruise lines would like to apologize to passengers for the contin-
uing delay to this flight. we are currently awaiting the loading of our comple-
ment of small lemon-soaked paper napkins for your comfort, refreshment and

61

hygiene during the journey. meanwhile we thank you for your patience. the
cabin crew will shortly be serving coffee and biscuits again.
zaphod staggered backwards, staring wildly at the ship.
he walked around for a few moments in a daze. in so doing he suddenly caught
sight of a giant departure board still hanging, but by only one support, from
the ceiling above him. it was covered with grime, but some of the figures were
still discernible.
zaphods eyes searched amongst the figures, then made some brief calcula-
tions. his eyes widened.
nine hundred years ... he breathed to himself. that was how late the ship
was.
two minutes later he was on board.
as he stepped out of the airlock, the air that greeted him was cool and fresh
- the air conditioning was still working.
the lights were still on.
he moved out of the small entrance chamber into a short narrow corridor and
stepped nervously down it.
suddenly a door opened and a figure stepped out in front of him.
please return to your seat sir, said the android stewardess and, turning her
back on him, she walked on down the corridor in front of him.
when his heart had started beating again he followed her. she opened the
door at the end of the corridor and walked through.
he followed her through the door.
they were now in the passenger compartment and zaphods heart stopped
still again for a moment.
in every seat sat a passenger, strapped into his or her seat.
the passengers hair was long and unkempt, their fingernails were long, the
men wore beards.
all of them were quite clearly alive - but sleeping.
zaphod had the creeping horrors.
he walked slowly down the aisle as in a dream. by the time he was half-way
down the aisle, the stewardess had reached the other end. she turned and
spoke.
good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, she said sweetly, thank you for bear-
ing with us during this slight delay. we will be taking off as soon as we possibly
can. if you would like to wake up now i will serve you coffee and biscuits.
there was a slight hum.
at that moment, all the passengers awoke.
they awoke screaming and clawing at their straps and life support systems
that held them tightly in their seats. they screamed and bawled and hollered

62

chapter 11.

till zaphod thought his ears would shatter.
they struggled and writhed as the stewardess patiently moved up the aisle
placing a small cup of coffee and a packet of biscuits in front of each one of
them.
then one of them rose from his seat.
he turned and looked at zaphod.
zaphods skin was crawling all over his body as if it was trying to get off. he
turned and ran from the bedlam.
he plunged through the door and back into the corridor.
the man pursued him.
he raced in a frenzy to the end of the corridor, through the entrance chamber
and beyond. he arrived on the flight deck, slammed and bolted the door be-
hind him. he leant back against the door breathing hard.
within seconds, a hand started beating on the door.
from somewhere on the flight deck a metallic voice addressed him.
passengers are not allowed on the flight deck. please return to your seat, and
wait for the ship to take off. coffee and biscuits are being served. this is your
autopilot speaking. please return to your seat.
zaphod said nothing. he breathed hard, behind him, the hand continued to
knock on the door.
please return to your seat, repeated the autopilot. passengers are not al-
lowed on the flight deck.
im not a passenger, panted zaphod.
please return to your seat.
i am not a passenger! shouted zaphod again.
please return to your seat.
i am not a ... hello, can you hear me?
please return to your seat.
youre the autopilot? said zaphod.
yes, said the voice from the flight console.
youre in charge of this ship?
yes, said the voice again, there has been a delay. passengers are to be
kept temporarily in suspended animation, for their comfort and convenience.
coffee and biscuits are being served every year, after which passengers are
returned to suspended animation for their continued comfort and convenience.
departure will take place when the flight stores are complete. we apologize
for the delay.
zaphod moved away from the door, on which the pounding had now ceased.
he approached the flight console.
delay? he cried, have you seen the world outside this ship? its a waste-

63

land, a desert. civilizations been and gone, man. there are no lemon-soaked
paper napkins on the way from anywhere!
the statistical likelihood, continued the autopilot primly, is that other civ-
ilizations will arise. there will one day be lemon-soaked paper napkins. till
then there will be a short delay. please return to your seat.
but ...
but at that moment the door opened. zaphod span round to see the man who
had pursued him standing there. he carried a large briefcase. he was smartly
dressed, and his hair was short. he had no beard and no long fingernails.
zaphod beeblebrox, he said, my name is zarniwoop. i believe you wanted
to see me.
zaphod beeblebrox wittered. his mouths said foolish things. he dropped into
a chair.
oh man, oh man, where did you spring from? he said.
ive been waiting here for you, he said in a businesslike tone.
he put the briefcase down and sat in another chair.
i am glad you followed instructions, he said, i was a bit nervous that you
might have left my office by the door rather than the window. then you would
have been in trouble.
zaphod shook his heads at him and burbled.
when you entered the door of my office, you entered my electronically syn-
thesized universe, he explained, if you had left by the door you would have
been back in the real one. the artificial one works from here.
he patted the briefcase smugly.
zaphod glared at him with resentment and loathing.
whats the difference? he muttered.
nothing, said zarniwoop, they are identical. oh - except that i think the
frogstar fighters are grey in the real universe.
whats going on? spat zaphod.
simple, said zarniwoop. his self assurance and smugness made zaphod
seethe.
very simple, repeated zarniwoop, i discovered the coordinated at which
this man could be found - the man who rules the universe, and discovered
that his world was protected by an unprobability field. to protect my secret
- and myself - i retreated to the safety of this totally artificial universe and
hid myself away in a forgotten cruise liner. i was secure. meanwhile, you and
i ...
you and i? said zaphod angrily, you mean i knew you?
yes, said zarniwoop, we knew each other well.
i had no taste, said zaphod and resumed a sullen silence.

64

chapter 11.

meanwhile, you and i arranged that you would steal the improbability drive
ship - the only one which could reach the rulers world - and bring it to me
here. this you have now done i trust, and i congratulate you. he smiled a
tight little smile which zaphod wanted to hit with a brick.
oh, and in case you were wondering, added zarniwoop, this universe was
created specifically for you to come to. you are therefore the most important
person in this universe. you would never, he said with an even more brick-
able smile, have survived the total perspective vortex in the real one. shall
we go?
where? said zaphod sullenly. he felt collapsed.
to your ship. the heart of gold. you did bring it i trust?
no.
where is your jacket?
zaphod looked at him in mystification.
my jacket? i took it off. its outside.
good, we will go and find it.
zarniwoop stood up and gestured to zaphod to follow him.
out in the entrance chamber again, they could hear the screams of the pas-
sengers being fed coffee and biscuits.
it has not been a pleasant experience waiting for you, said zarniwoop.
not pleasant for you! bawled zaphod, how do you think ...
zarniwoop held up a silencing finger as the hatchway swung open. a few feet
away from them they could see zaphods jacket lying in the debris.
a very remarkable and very powerful ship, said zarniwoop, watch.
as they watched, the pocket on the jacket suddenly bulged. it split, it ripped.
the small metal model of the heart of gold that zaphod had been bewildered
to discover in his pocket was growing.
it grew, it continued to grow. it reached, after two minutes, its full size.
at an improbability level, said zarniwoop, of ... oh i dont know, but
something very large.
zaphod swayed.
you mean i had it with me all the time?
zarniwoop smiled. he lifted up his briefcase and opened it.
he twisted a single switch inside it.
goodbye artificial universe, he said, hello real one!
the scene before them shimmered briefly - and reappeared exactly as before.
you see? said zarniwoop, exactly the same.
you mean, repeated zaphod tautly, that i had it with me all the time?
oh yes, said zarniwoop, of course. that was the whole point.
thats it, said zaphod, you can count me out, from hereon in you can count

me out. ive had all i want of this. you play your own games.
im afraid you cannot leave, said zarniwoop, you are entwined in the im-
probability field. you cannot escape.
he smiled the smile that zaphod had wanted to hit and this time zaphod hit it.66

chapter 11.



ford prefect bounded up to the bridge of the heart of gold.
trillian! arthur! he shouted, its working! the ships reactivated!
trillian and arthur were asleep on the floor.
come on you guys, were going off, were off, he said kicking them awake.
hi there guys! twittered the computer, its really great to be back with you
again, i can tell you, and i just want to say that ...
shut up, said ford, tell us where the hell we are.
frogstar world b, and man its a dump, said zaphod running on to the
bridge, hi, guys, you must be so amazingly glad to see me you dont even
find words to tell me what a cool frood i am.
what a what? said arthur blearily, picking himself up from the floor and
not taking any of this in.
i know how you feel, said zaphod, im so great even i get tongue-tied talk-
ing to myself. hey its good to see you trillian, ford, monkeyman. hey, er,
computer ...?
hi there, mr beeblebrox sir, sure is a great honor to ...
shut up and get us out of here, fast fast fast.
sure thing, fella, where do you want to go?
anywhere, doesnt matter, shouted zaphod, yes it does! he said again,
we want to go to the nearest place to eat!
sure thing, said the computer happily and a massive explosion rocket the
bridge.
when zarniwoop entered a minute or so later with a black eye, he regarded
the four wisps of smoke with interest.68

chapter 12.



four inert bodies sank through spinning blackness. consciousness had died,
cold oblivion pulled the bodies down and down into the pit of unbeing. the
roar of silence echoed dismally around them and they sank at last into a dark
and bitter sea of heaving red that slowly engulfed them, seemingly for ever.
after what seemed an eternity the sea receded and left them lying on a cold
hard shore, the flotsam and jetsam of the stream of life, the universe, and
everything.
cold spasms shook them, lights danced sickeningly around them. the cold
hard shore tipped and span and then stood still. it shone darkly - it was a
very highly polished cold hard shore.
a green blur watched them disapprovingly.
it coughed.
good evening, madam, gentlemen, it said, do you have a reservation?
ford prefects consciousness snapped back like elastic, making his brain smart.
he looked up woozily at the green blur.
reservation? he said weakly. yes, sir, said the green blur.
do you need a reservation for the afterlife?
in so far as it is possible for a green blur to arch its eyebrows disdainfully, this
is what the green blur now did.
afterlife, sir? it said.
arthur dent was grappling with his consciousness the way one grapples with
a lost bar of soap in the bath.
is this the afterlife? he stammered.
well i assume so, said ford prefect trying to work out which way was up.
he tested the theory that it must lie in the opposite direction from the cold
hard shore on which he was lying, and staggered to what he hoped were his
feet.
i mean, he said, swaying gently, theres no way we could have survived that70

chapter 13.

blast is there?
no, muttered arthur. he had raised himself on to his elbows but it didnt
seem to improve things. he slumped down again.
no, said trillian, standing up, no way at all.
a dull hoarse gurgling sound came from the floor. it was zaphod beeblebrox
attempting to speak. i certainly didnt survive, he gurgled, i was a total
goner. wham bang and that was it.
yeah, thanks to you, said ford, we didnt stand a chance. we must have
been blown to bits. arms, legs everywhere.
yeah, said zaphod struggling noisily to his feet.
if the lady and gentlemen would like to order drinks ... said the green blur,
hovering impatiently beside them.
kerpow, splat, continued zaphod, instantaneously zonked into our compo-
nent molecules. hey, ford, he said, identifying one of the slowly solidifying
blurs around him, did you get that thing of your whole life flashing before
you?
you got that too? said ford, your whole life?
yeah, said zaphod, at least i assume it was mine. i spent a lot of time out
of my skulls you know.
he looked at around him at the various shapes that were at last becoming
proper shapes instead of vague and wobbling shapeless shapes.
so ... he said.
so what? said ford.
so here we are, said zaphod hesitantly, lying dead ...
standing, trillian corrected him.
er, standing dead, continued zaphod, in this desolate ...
restaurant, said arthur dent who had got to his feet and could now, much
to his surprise, see clearly. that is to say, the thing that surprised him was
not that he could see, but what he could see.
here we are, continued zaphod doggedly, standing dead in this desolate
...
five star ... said trillian.
restaurant, concluded zaphod.
odd isnt it? said ford.
er, yeah.
nice chandeliers though, said trillian.
they looked about themselves in bemusement.
its not so much an afterlife, said arthur, more a sort of apres vie.
the chandeliers were in fact a little on the flashy side and the low vaulted ceil-
ing from which they hung would not, in an ideal universe, have been painted

71

in that particular shade of deep turquoise, and even if it had been it wouldnt
have been highlighted by concealed moodlighting. this is not, however, an
ideal universe, as was further evidenced by the eye-crossing patterns of the
inlaid marble floor, and the way in which the fronting for the eighty-yard
long marble-topped bar had been made. the fronting for the eighty-yard long
marble-topped bar had been made by stitching together nearly twenty thou-
sand antarean mosaic lizard skins, despite the fact that the twenty thousand
lizards concerned had needed them to keep their insides in.
a few smartly dressed creatures were lounging casually at the bar or relaxing
in the richly coloured body-hugging seats that were deployed here and there
about the bar area. a young vlhurg officer and his green steaming young
lady passed through the large smoked glass doors at the far end of the bar into
the dazzling light of the main body of the restaurant beyond.
behind arthur was a large curtained bay window. he pulled aside the corner of
the curtain and looked out at a landscape which under normal circumstances
would have given arthur the creeping horrors. these were not, however, nor-
mal circumstances, for the thing that froze his blood and made his skin try to
crawl up his back and off the top of his head was the sky. the sky was ...
an attendant flunkey politely drew the curtain back into place.
all in good time, sir, he said.
zaphods eyes flashed.
hey, hang about you dead guys, he said, i think were missing some ultra-
important thing here you know. something somebody said and we missed it.
arthur was profoundly relieved to turn his attention from what he had just
seen.
he said, i said it was a sort of apres ...
yeah, and dont you wish you hadnt? said zaphod, ford?
i said it was odd.
yeah, shrewd but dull, perhaps it was ...
perhaps, interrupted the green blur who had by this time resolved into the
shape of a small wizened dark-suited green waiter, perhaps you would care
to discuss the matter over drinks ...
drinks! cried zaphod, that was it! see what you miss if you dont stay
alert.
indeed sir, said the waiter patiently. if the lady and gentlemen would care
to order drinks before dinner ...
dinner! zaphod exclaimed with passion, listen, little green person, my
stomach could take you home and cuddle you all night for the mere idea.
... and the universe, concluded the waiter, determined not to be deflected
on his home stretch, will explode later for your pleasure.

72

chapter 13.

fords head swivelled towards him. he spoke with feeling.
wow, he said, what sort of drinks do you serve in this place?
the waiter laughed a polite little waiters laugh.
ah, he said, i think sir has perhaps misunderstood me.
oh, i hope not, breathed ford.
the waiter coughed a polite little waiters cough.
it is not unusual for our customers to be a little disoriented by the time jour-
ney, he said, so if i might suggest ...
time journey? said zaphod.
time journey? said ford.
time journey? said trillian.
you mean this isnt the afterlife? said arthur.
the waiter smiled a polite little waiters smile. he had almost exhausted his
polite little waiter repertoire and would soon be slipping into his role of a
rather tight lipped and sarcastic little waiter.
afterlife sir? he said, no sir.
and were not dead? said arthur.
the waiter tightened his lips.
aha, ha, he said, sir is most evidently alive, otherwise i would not attempt
to serve sir.
in an extraordinary gesture which is pointless attempting to describe, zaphod
beeblebrox slapped both his foreheads with two of his arms and one of his
thighs with the other.
hey guys, he said, this is crazy. we finally did it. we finally got to where
we were going. this is milliways!
yes sir, said the waiter, laying on the patience with a trowel, this is milli-
ways - the restaurant at the end of the universe.
end of what? said arthur.
the universe, repeated the waiter, very clearly and unnecessarily distinctly.
when did that end? said arthur.
in just a few minutes, sir, said the waiter. he took a deep breath. he didnt
need to do this since his body was supplied with the peculiar assortment of
gases it required for survival from a small intravenous device strapped to his
leg. there are times, however, when whatever your metabolism you have to
take a deep breath.
now, if you would care to order drinks at last, he said, i will then show
you to your table.
zaphod grinned two manic grins, sauntered over to the bar and bought most
of it.



the restaurant at the end of the universe is one of the most extraordinary
ventures in the entire history of catering. it has been built on the fragmented
remains of ... it will be built on the fragmented ... that is to say it will have
been built by this time, and indeed has been -
one of the major problems encountered in time travel is not that of acciden-
tally becoming your own father or mother. there is no problem involved in
becoming your own father or mother that a broadminded and well-adjusted
family cant cope with. there is also no problem about changing the course
of history - the course of history does not change because it all fits together
like a jigsaw. all the important changes have happened before the things they
were supposed to change and it all sorts itself out in the end.
the major problem is quite simply one of grammar, and the main work to con-
sult in this matter is dr dan streetmentioners time travellers handbook of
1001 tense formations. it will tell you for instance how to describe something
that was about to happen to you in the past before you avoided it by time-
jumping forward two days in order to avoid it. the event will be described
differently according to whether you are talking about it from the standpoint
of your own natural time, from a time in the further future, or a time in the
further past and is further complicated by the possibility of conducting con-
versations whilst you are actually travelling from one time to another with the
intention of becoming your own father or mother.
most readers get as far as the future semi-conditionally modified subinverted
plagal past subjunctive intentional before giving up: and in fact in later edi-
tions of the book all the pages beyond this point have been left blank to save
on printing costs.
the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy skips lightly over this tangle of aca-
demic abstraction, pausing only to note that the term future perfect has
been abandoned since it was discovered not to be.74

chapter 14.

to resume:
the restaurant at the end of the universe is one of the most extraordinary
ventures in the entire history of catering.
it is built on the fragmented remains of an eventually ruined planet which is
(wioll haven be) enclosed in a vast time bubble and projected forward in time
to the precise moment of the end of the universe.
this is, many would say, impossible.
in it, guests take (willan on-take) their places at table and eat (willan on-eat)
sumptuous meals whilst watching (willing watchen) the whole of creation ex-
plode around them.
this is, many would say, equally impossible.
you can arrive (mayan arivan on-when) for any sitting you like without prior
(late fore-when) reservation because you can book retrospectively, as it were
when you return to your own time. (you can have on-book haventa forewhen
presooning returningwenta retrohome.)
this is, many would now insist, absolutely impossible.
at the restaurant you can meet and dine with (mayan meetan con with dinan
on when) a fascinating cross-section of the entire population of space and time.
this, it can be explained patiently, is also impossible.
you can visit it as many times as you like (mayan on-visit re- onvisiting ... and
so on - for further tense-corrections consult dr streetmentioners book) and
be sure of never meeting yourself, because of the embarrassment this usually
causes.
this, even if the rest were true, which it isnt, is patently impossible, say the
doubters.
all you have to do is deposit one penny in a savings account in your own era,
and when you arrive at the end of time the operation of compound interest
means that the fabulous cost of your meal has been paid for.
this, many claim, is not merely impossible but clearly insane, which is why
the advertising executives of the star system of bastablon came up with this
slogan: if youve done six impossible things this morning, why not round it
off with breakfast at milliways, the restaurant at the end of the universe?



at the bar, zaphod was rapidly becoming as tired as a newt. his heads knocked
together and his smiles were coming out of synch. he was miserably happy.
zaphod, said ford, whilst youre still capable of speech, would you care to
tell me what the photon happened? where have you been? where have we
been? small matter, but id like it cleared up.
zaphods left head sobered up, leaving his right to sink further into the obscu-
rity of drink.
yeah, he said, ive been around. they want me to find the man who rules
the universe, but i dont care to meet him. i believe the man cant cook.
his left head watched his right head saying this and then nodded.
true, it said, have another drink.
ford had another pan galactic gargle blaster, the drink which has been de-
scribed as the alcoholic equivalent of a mugging - expensive and bad for the
head. whatever had happened, ford decided, he didnt really care too much.
listen ford, said zaphod, everythings cool and froody.
you mean everythings under control.
no, said zaphod, i do not mean everythings under control. that would
not be cool and froody. if you want to know what happened lets just say i
had the whole situation in my pocket. ok?
ford shrugged.
zaphod giggled into his drink.
started to eat its way into the marble bar top.
a wild-skinned sky-gypsy approached them and played electric violin at them
until zaphod gave him a lot of money and he agreed to go away again.
the gypsy approached arthur and trillian sitting in another part of the bar.
i dont know what this place is, said arthur, but i think it gives me the
creeps.
have another drink, said trillian, enjoy yourself.

it frothed up over the side of the glass and76

chapter 15.

which? said arthur, the two are mutually exclusive.
poor arthur, youre not really cut out for this life are you?
you call this life?
youre beginning to sound like marvin.
marvins the clearest thinker i know. how do you think we make this violinist
go away?
the waiter approached.
your table is ready, he said.
seen from the outside, which it never is, the restaurant resembles a giant glit-
tering starfish beached on a forgotten rock. each of its arms houses the bars,
the kitchens, the forcefield generators which protect the entire structure and
the decayed planet on which it sits, and the time turbines which slowly rock
the whole affair backwards and forwards across the crucial moment.
in the centre sits the gigantic golden dome, almost a complete globe, and it
was into this area that zaphod, ford, arthur and trillian now passed.
at least five tons of glitter alone had gone into it before them, and covered
every available surface. the other surfaces were not available because they
were already encrusted with jewels, precious sea shells from santraginus, gold
leaf, mosaic tiles, lizard skins and a million unidentifiable embellishments and
decorations. glass glittered, silver shone, gold gleamed, arthur dent goggled.
wowee, said zaphod, zappo.
incredible! breathed arthur, the people ... ! the things ... !
the things, said ford prefect quietly, are also people.
the people ... resumed arthur, the ... other people ...
the lights ... ! said trillian.
the tables ... said arthur.
the clothes ... ! said trillian.
the waiter thought they sounded like a couple of bailiffs.
the end of the universe is very popular, said zaphod threading his way
unsteadily through the throng of tables, some made of marble, some of rich
ultra-mahagony, some even of platinum, and at each a party of exotic creatures
chatting amongst themselves and studying menus.
people like to dress up for it, continued zaphod, gives it a sense of occa-
sion.
the tables were fanned out in a large circle around a central stage area where
a small band were playing light music, at least a thousand tables was arthurs
guess, and interspersed amongst them were swaying palms, hissing fountains,
grotesque statuary, in short all the paraphernalia common to all restaurants
where little expense has been spared to give the impression that no expense
has been spared. arthur glanced around, half expecting to see someone mak-

77

ing an american express commercial.
zaphod lurched into ford, who lurched back into zaphod.
wowee, said zaphod.
zappo, said ford.
my great granddaddy must have really screwed up the computers works, you
know, said zaphod, i told it to take us to the nearest place to eat and it
sends us to the end of the universe. remind me to be nice to it one day.
he paused.
hey, everybodys here you know. everybody who was anybody.
was? said arthur.
at the end of the universe you have to use the past tense a lot, said zaphod,
cos everythings been done you know. hi, guys, he called out to a nearby
party of giant iguana lifeforms, how did you do?
is that zaphod beeblebrox? asked one iguana of another iguana.
i think so, replied the second iguana.
well doesnt that just take the biscuit, said the first iguana.
funny old thing, life, said the second iguana.
its what you make of it, said the first and they lapsed back into silence.
they were waiting for the greatest show in the universe.
hey, zaphod, said ford, grabbing for his arm and, on account of the third
pan galactic gargle blaster, missing. he pointed a swaying finger.
theres an old mate of mine, he said, hotblack desiato! see the man at
the platinum table with the platinum suit on?
zaphod tried to follow fords finger with his eyes but it made him feel dizzy.
finally he saw.
oh yeah, he said, then recognition came a moment later. hey, he said,
did that guy ever make it megabig! wow, bigger than the biggest thing ever.
other than me.
whos he supposed to be? asked trillian.
hotblack desiato? said zaphod in astonishment, you dont know? you
never heard of disaster area?
no, said trillian, who hadnt.
the biggest, said ford, loudest ...
richest ... suggested zaphod.
... rock band in the history of ... he searched for the word.
... history itself, said zaphod.
no, said trillian.
zowee, said zaphod, here we are at the end of the universe and you havent
even lived yet. did you miss out.
he led her off to where the waiter had been waiting all this time at the table.

78

chapter 15.

arthur followed them feeling very lost and alone.
ford waded off through the throng to renew an old acquaintance.
hey, er, hotblack, he called out, how you doing? great to see you big
boy, hows the noise? youre looking great, really very, very fat and unwell.
amazing. he slapped the man on the back and was mildly surprised that it
seemed to elict no response. the pan galactic gargle blasters swirling round
inside him told him to plunge on regardless.
remember the old days? he said, we used to hang out, right? the bistro
illegal, remember? slims throat emporium? the evildrome boozarama,
great days eh?
hotblack desiato offered no opinion as to whether they were great days or
not. ford was not perturbed.
and when we were hungry wed pose as public health inspectors, you remem-
ber that? and go around confiscating meals and drinks right? till we got food
poisoning. oh, and then there were the long nights of talking and drinking
in those smelly rooms above the cafe lou in gretchen town, new betel, and
you were always in the next room trying to write songs on your ajuitar and
we all hated them. and you said you didnt care, and we said we did because
we hated them so much. fords eyes were beginning to mist over.
and you said you didnt want to be a star, he continued, wallowing in nos-
talgia, because you despised the star system. and we said, hadra and sulijoo
and me, that we didnt think you had the option. and what do you do now?
you buy star systems!
he turned and solicited the attention of those at nearby tables.
here, he said, is a man who buys star systems!
hotblack desiato made no attempt either to confirm or deny this fact, and
the attention of the temporary audience waned rapidly.
i think someones drunk, muttered a purple bush-like being into his wine
glass.
ford staggered slightly, and sat down heavily on the chair facing hotblack
desiato.
whats that number you do? he said, unwisely grabbing at a bottle for
support and tipping it over - into a nearby glass as it happened. not to waste
a happy accident, he drained the glass.
that really huge number, he continued, how does it go? bwarm! bwarm!
baderr!! something, and in the stage act you do it ends up with this ship
crashing right into the sun, and you actually do it!
ford crashed his fist into his other hand to illustrate this feat graphically. he
knocked the bottle over again.
ship! sun! wham bang! he cried. i mean forget lasers and stuff, you guys

79

are into solar flares and real sunburn! oh, and terrible songs.
his eyes followed the stream of liquid glugging out of the bottle on to the table.
something ought to be done about it, he thought.
hey, you want a drink? he said. it began to sink into his squelching mind
that something was missing from this reunion, and that the missing something
was in some way connected with the fact that the fat man sitting opposite
him in the platinum suit and the silvery trilby had not yet said hi, ford or
great to see you after all this time, or in fact anything at all. more to the
point he had not yet even moved.
hotblack? said ford.
a large meaty hand landed on his shoulder from behind and pushed him aside.
he slid gracelessly off his seat and peered upwards to see if he could spot the
owner of this discourteous hand. the owner was not hard to spot, on account
of his being something of the order of seven feet tall and not slightly built with
it. in fact he was built the way one builds leather sofas, shiny, lumpy and with
lots of solid stuffing. the suit into which the mans body had been stuffed
looked as if its only purpose in life was to demonstrate how difficult it was to
get this sort of body into a suit. the face had the texture of an orange and
the colour of an apple, but there the resemblance to anything sweet ended.
kid ... said a voice which emerged from the mans mouth as if it had been
having a really rough time down in his chest.
er, yeah? said ford conversationally. he staggered back to his feet again
and was disappointed that the top of his head didnt come further up the mans
body.
beat it, said the man.
oh yeah? said ford, wondering how wise he was being, and who are you?
the man considered this for a moment. he wasnt used to being asked this
sort of question. nevertheless, after a while he came up with an answer.
im the guy whos telling you to beat it, he said, before you get it beaten
for you.
now listen, said ford nervously - he wished his head would stop spinning,
settle down and get to grips with the situation - now listen, he continued,
i am one of hotblacks oldest friends and ...
he glanced at hotblack desiato, who still hadnt moved so much as an eyelash.
... and ... said ford again, wondering what would be a good word to say
after and.
the large man came up with a whole sentence to go after and. he said it.
and i am mr desiatos bodyguard, it went, and i am responsible for his
body, and i am not responsible for yours, so take it away before it gets dam-
aged.

80

chapter 15.

now wait a minute, said ford.
no minutes! boomed the bodyguard, no waiting! mr desiato speaks to no
one!
well perhaps youd let him say what he thinks about the matter himself,
said ford.
he speaks to no one! bellowed the bodyguard.
ford glanced anxiously at hotblack again and was forced to admit to himself
that the bodyguard seemed to have the facts on his side. there was still not
the slightest sign of movement, let alone keen interest in fords welfare.
why? said ford, whats the matter with him?
the bodyguard told him.



the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy notes that disaster area, a plutonium
rock band from the gagrakacka mind zones, are generally held to be not only
the loudest rock band in the galaxy, but in fact the loudest noise of any kind
at all. regular concert goers judge that the best sound balance is usually to
be heard from within large concrete bunkers some thirty-seven miles from the
stage, whilst the musicians themselves play their instruments by remote con-
trol from within a heavily insulated spaceship which stays in orbit around the
planet - or more frequently around a completely different planet.
their songs are on the whole very simple and mostly follow the familiar theme
of boy-being meets girl-being beneath a silvery moon, which then explodes for
no adequately explored reason.
many worlds have now banned their act altogether, sometimes for artistic
reasons, but most commonly because the bands public address system con-
travenes local strategic arms limitations treaties.
this has not, however, stopped their earnings from pushing back the bound-
aries of pure hypermathematics, and their chief research accountant has re-
cently been appointed professor of neomathematics at the university of maximega-
lon, in recognition of both his general and his special theories of disaster area
tax returns, in which he proves that the whole fabric of the space- time con-
tinuum is not merely curved, it is in fact totally bent.
ford staggered back to the table where zaphod, arthur and trillian were sit-
ting waiting for the fun to begin.
gotta have some food, said ford.
hi, ford, said zaphod, you speak to the big noise boy?
ford waggled his head noncommittally.
hotblack? i sort of spoke to him, yeah.
whatd he say?
well, not a lot really. hes ... er ...82

chapter 16.

yeah?
hes spending a year dead for tax reasons. ive got to sit down.
he sat down.
the waiter approached.
would you like to see the menu? he said, or would you like to meet the
dish of the day?
huh? said ford.
huh? said arthur.
huh? said trillian.
thats cool, said zaphod, well meet the meat.
in a small room in one of the arms of the restaurant complex a tall, thin,
gangling figure pulled aside a curtain and oblivion looked him in the face.
it was not a pretty face, perhaps because oblivion had looked him in it so many
times. it was too long for a start, the eyes too sunken and too hooded, the
cheeks too hollow, his lips were too thin and too long, and when they parted
his teeth looked too much like a recently polished bay window. the hands
that held the curtain were long and thin too: they were also cold. they lay
lightly along the folds of the curtain and gave the impression that if he didnt
watch them like a hawk they would crawl away of their own accord and do
something unspeakable in a corner.
he let the curtain drop and the terrible light that had played on his features
went off to play somewhere more healthy. he prowled around his small cham-
ber like a mantis contemplating an evenings preying, finally settling on a
rickety chair by a trestle table, where he leafed through a few sheets of jokes.
a bell rang.
he pushed the thin sheaf of papers aside and stood up. his hands brushed
limply over some of the one million rainbow-coloured sequins with which his
jacket was festooned, and he was gone through the door.
in the restaurant the lights dimmed, the band quickened its pace, a single
spotlight stabbed down into the darkness of the stairway that led up to the
centre of the stage.
up the stairs bounded bounded a tall brilliantly coloured figure. he burst on
to the stage, tripped lightly up to the microphone, removed it from its stand
with one swoop of his long thin hand and stood for a moment bowing left and
right to the audience acknowledging their applause and displaying to them his
bay window. he waved to his particular friends in the audience even though
there werent any there, and waited for the applause to die down.
he held up his hand and smiled a smile that stretched not merely from ear to
ear, but seemed to extend some way beyond the mere confines of his face.
thank you ladies and gentlemen! he cried, thank you very much. thank

83

you so much.
he eyed them with a twinkling eye.
ladies and gentlemen, he said, the universe as we know it has now been
in existence for over one hundred and seventy thousand million billion years
and will be ending in a little over half an hour. so, welcome one and all to
milliways, the restaurant at the end of the universe!
with a gesture he deftly conjured another round of spontaneous applause.
with another gesture he cut it.
i am your host for tonight, he said, my name is max quordlepleen ...
(everybody knew this, his act was famous throughout the known galaxy, but
he said it for the fresh applause it generated, which he acknowledged with a
disclaiming smile and wave.) ... and ive just come straight from the very
very other end of time, where ive been hosting a show at the big bang burger
bar - where i can tell you we had a very exciting evening ladies and gentlemen
- and i will be with you right through this historic occasion, the end of history
itself!
another burst of applause died away quickly as the lights dimmed down fur-
ther. on every table candles ignited themselves spontaneously, eliciting a slight
gasp from all the diners and wreathing them in a thousand tiny flickering lights
and a million intimate shadows. a tremor of excitement thrilled through the
darkened restaurant as the vast golden dome above them began very very
slowly to dim, to darken, to fade.
maxs voice was hushed as he continued.
so, ladies and gentlemen, he breathed, the candles are lit, the band plays
softly, and as the force-shielded dome above us fades into transparency, reveal-
ing a dark and sullen sky hung heavy with the ancient light of livid swollen
stars, i can see were all in for a fabulous evenings apocalypse!
even the soft tootling of the band faded away as stunned shock descended on
all those who had not seen this sight before.
a monstrous, grisly light poured in on them,
- a hideous light,
- a boiling, pestilential light,
- a light that would have disfigured hell.
the universe was coming to an end.
for a few interminable seconds the restaurant span silently through the raging
void. then max spoke again.
for those of you who ever hoped to see the light at the end of the tunnel,
he said, this is it.
the band struck up again.
thank you, ladies and gentlemen, cried max, ill be back with you again

84

chapter 16.

in just a moment, and meanwhile i leave you in the very capable hands of mr
reg nullify and his cataclysmic combo. big hand please ladies and gentlemen
for reg and the boys!
the baleful turmoil of the skies continued.
hesitantly the audience began to clap and after a moment or so normal conver-
sation resumed. max began his round of the tables, swapping jokes, shouting
with laughter, earning his living.
a large dairy animal approached zaphod beeblebroxs table, a large fat meaty
quadruped of the bovine type with large watery eyes, small horns and what
might almost have been an ingratiating smile on its lips.
good evening, it lowed and sat back heavily on its haunches, i am the main
dish of the day. may i interest you in parts of my body? it harrumphed and
gurgled a bit, wriggled its hind quarters into a more comfortable position and
gazed peacefully at them.
its gaze was met by looks of startled bewilderment from arthur and trillian, a
resigned shrug from ford prefect and naked hunger from zaphod beeblebrox.
something off the shoulder perhaps? suggested the animal, braised in a
white wine sauce?
er, your shoulder? said arthur in a horrified whisper.
but naturally my shoulder, sir, mooed the animal contentedly, nobody
elses is mine to offer.
zaphod leapt to his feet and started prodding and feeling the animals shoulder
appreciatively.
or the rump is very good, murmured the animal. ive been exercising it
and eating plenty of grain, so theres a lot of good meat there. it gave a
mellow grunt, gurgled again and started to chew the cud. it swallowed the
cud again.
or a casserole of me perhaps? it added.
you mean this animal actually wants us to eat it? whispered trillian to
ford.
me? said ford, with a glazed look in his eyes, i dont mean anything.
thats absolutely horrible, exclaimed arthur, the most revolting thing ive
ever heard.
whats the problem earthman? said zaphod, now transferring his attention
to the animals enormous rump.
i just dont want to eat an animal thats standing here inviting me to, said
arthur, its heartless.
better than eating an animal that doesnt want to be eaten, said zaphod.
thats not the point, arthur protested. then he thought about it for a mo-
ment. alright, he said, maybe it is the point. i dont care, im not going

85

to think about it now. ill just ... er ...
the universe raged about him in its death throes.
i think ill just have a green salad, he muttered.
may i urge you to consider my liver? asked the animal, it must be very
rich and tender by now, ive been force-feeding myself for months.
a green salad, said arthur emphatically.
a green salad? said the animal, rolling his eyes disapprovingly at arthur.
are you going to tell me, said arthur, that i shouldnt have green salad?
well, said the animal, i know many vegetables that are very clear on that
point. which is why it was eventually decided to cut through the whole tan-
gled problem and breed an animal that actually wanted to be eaten and was
capable of saying so clearly and distinctly. and here i am.
it managed a very slight bow.
glass of water please, said arthur.
look, said zaphod, we want to eat, we dont want to make a meal of the
issues. four rare steaks please, and hurry. we havent eaten in five hundred
and seventy-six thousand million years.
the animal staggered to its feet. it gave a mellow gurgle.
a very wise choice, sir, if i may say so. very good, it said, ill just nip off
and shoot myself.
he turned and gave a friendly wink to arthur.
dont worry, sir, he said, ill be very humane.
it waddled unhurriedly off into the kitchen.
a matter of minutes later the waiter arrived with four huge steaming steaks.
zaphod and ford wolfed straight into them without a seconds hesitation. tril-
lian paused, then shrugged and started into hers.
arthur stared at his feeling slightly ill.
hey, earthman, said zaphod with a malicious grin on the face that wasnt
stuffing itself, whats eating you?
and the band played on.
all around the restaurant people and things relaxed and chatted. the air was
filled with talk of this and that, and with the mingled scents of exotic plants,
extravagant foods and insidious wines. for an infinite number of miles in ev-
ery direction the universal cataclysm was gathering to a stupefying climax.
glancing at his watch, max returned to the stage with a flourish.
and now, ladies and gentlemen, he beamed, is everyone having one last
wonderful time?
yes, called out the sort of people who call out yes when comedians ask
them if theyre having a wonderful time.
thats wonderful, enthused max, absolutely wonderful. and as the photon

86

chapter 16.

storms gather in swirling crowds around us, preparing to tear apart the last
of the red hot suns, i know youre all going to settle back and enjoy with me
what i know we will find all an immensely exciting and terminal experience.
he paused. he caught the audience with a glittering eye.
believe me, ladies and gentlemen, he said, theres nothing penultimate
about this one.
he paused again. tonight his timing was immaculate. time after time he had
done this show, night after night. not that the word night had any meaning
here at the extremity of time. all there was was the endless repetition of the
final moment, as the restaurant rocked slowly forward over the brink of times
furthest edge - and back again. this night was good though, the audience
was writhing in the palm of his sickly hand. his voice dropped. they had to
strain to hear him.
this, he said, really is the absolute end, the final chilling desolation, in
which the whole majestic sweep of creation becomes extinct. this ladies and
gentlemen is the proverbial it.
he dropped his voice still lower. in the stillness, a fly would not have dared
cleat its throat.
after this, he said, there is nothing. void. emptiness. oblivion. absolute
nothing ...
his eyes glittered again - or did they twinkle?
nothing ... except of course for the sweet trolley, and a fine selection of alde-
baran liqueurs!
the band gave him a musical sting. he wished they wouldnt, he didnt need
it, not an artist of his calibre. he could play the audience like his own musical
instrument. they were laughing with relief. he followed on.
and for once, he cried cheerily, you dont need to worry about having a
hangover in the morning - because there wont be any more mornings!
he beamed at his happy, laughing audience. he glanced up at the sky, going
through the same dead routine every night, but his glance was only for a frac-
tion of a second. he trusted it to do its job, as one professional trusts another.
and now, he said, strutting about the stage, at the risk of putting a damper
on the wonderful sense of doom and futility here this evening, i would like to
welcome a few parties.
he pulled a card from his pocket.
do we have ... he put up a hand to hold back the cheers, do we have a
party here from the zansellquasure flamarion bridge club from beyond the
vortvoid of qvarne? are they here?
a rousing cheer came from the back, but he pretended not to hear. he peered
around trying to find them.

87

are they here? he asked again, to elict a louder cheer.
he got it, as he always did.
ah, there they are. well, last bids lads - and no cheating, remember this is
a very solemn moment.
he lapped up the laughter.
and do we also have, do we have ... a party of minor deities from the halls
of asgard?
away to his right came a rumble of thunder. lightning arced across the stage.
a small group of hairy men with helmets sat looking very pleased with them-
selves, and raised their glasses to him.
hasbeens, he thought to himself.
careful with that hammer, sir, he said.
they did their trick with the lightning again. max gave them a very thin
lipped smile.
and thirdly, he said, thirdly a party of young conservatives from sirius b,
are they here?
a party of smartly dressed young dogs stopped throwing rolls at each other
and started throwing rolls at the stage. they yapped and barked unintelligi-
bly.
yes, said max, well this is all your fault, you realize that?
and finally, said max, quieting the audience down and putting on his solemn
face, finally i believe we have with us here tonight, a party of believers, very
devout believers, from the church of the second coming of the great prophet
zarquon.
there were about twenty of them, sitting right out on the edge of the floor,
ascetically dressed, sipping mineral water nervously, and staying apart from
the festivities. they blinked resentfully as the spotlight was turned on them.
there they are, said max, sitting there, patiently. he said hed come again,
and hes kept you waiting a long time, so lets hope hes hurrying fellas, be-
cause hes only got eight minutes left!
the party of zarquons followers sat rigid, refusing to be buffeted by the waves
of uncharitable laughter which swept over them.
max restrained his audience.
no, but seriously though folks, seriously though, no offence meant. no, i
know we shouldnt make fun of deeply held beliefs, so i think a big hand
please for the great prophet zarquon ...
the audience clapped respectfully.
... wherever hes got to!
he blew a kiss to the stony-faced party and returned to the centre of the stage.
he grabbed a tall stool and sat on it.

88

chapter 16.

in other words a

its marvellous though, he rattled on, to see so many of you here tonight -
no isnt it though? yes, absolutely marvellous. because i know that so many
of you come here time and time again, which i think is really wonderful, to
come and watch this final end of everything, and then return home to your
own eras ... and raise families, strive for new and better societies, fight terrible
wars for what you know to be right ... it really gives one hope for the future
of all lifekind. except of course, he waved at the blitzing turmoil above and
around them, that we know it hasnt got one ...
arthur turned to ford - he hadnt quite got this place worked out in his mind.
look, surely, he said, if the universe is about to end ... dont we go with
it?
ford gave him a three-pan-galactic-gargle-blaster look,
rather unsteady one.
no, he said, look, he said, as soon as you come into this dive you get
held in this sort of amazing force-shielded temporal warp thing. i think.
oh, said arthur. he turned his attention back to a bowl of soup hed man-
aged to get from the waiter to replace his steak.
look, said ford, ill show you.
he grabbed at a napkin off the table and fumbled hopelessly with it.
look, he said again, imagine this napkin, right, as the temporal universe,
right? and this spoon as a transductional mode in the matter curve ...
it took him a while to say this last part, and arthur hated to interrupt him.
thats the spoon i was eating with, he said.
alright, said ford, imagine this spoon ... he found a small wooden spoon
on a tray of relishes, this spoon ... but found it rather tricky to pick up,
no, better still this fork ...
hey would you let go of my fork? snapped zaphod.
alright, said ford, alright, alright. why dont we say ... why dont we say
that this wine glass is the temporal universe ...
what, the one youve just knocked on the floor?
did i do that?
yes.
alright, said ford, forget that. i mean ... i mean, look, do you know - do
you know how the universe actually began for a kick off?
probably not, said arthur, who wished hed never embarked on any of this.
alright, said ford, imagine this. right. you get this bath. right. a large
round bath. and its made of ebony.
where from? said arthur, harrods was destroyed by the vogons.
doesnt matter.
so you keep saying.

89

listen.
alright.
you get this bath, see? imagine youve got this bath. and its ebony. and
its conical.
conical? said arthur, what sort of ...
shhh! said ford. its conical. so what you do is, you see, you fill it with
fine white sand, alright? or sugar. fine white sand, and/or sugar. anything.
doesnt matter. sugars fine. and when its full, you pull the plug out ... are
you listening?
im listening.
you pull the plug out, and it all just twirls away, twirls away you see, out of
the plughole.
i see.
you dont see. you dont see at all. i havent got to the clever bit yet. you
want to hear the clever bit?
tell me the clever bit.
ill tell you the clever bit.
ford thought for a moment, trying to remember what the clever bit was.
the clever bit, he said, is this. you film it happening.
clever.
thats not the clever bit. this is the clever bit, i remember now that this is
the clever bit. the clever bit is that you then thread the film in the projector
... backwards!
backwards?
yes. threading it backwards is definitely the clever bit. so then, you just sit
and watch it, and everything just appears to spiral upwards out of the plughole
and fill the bath. see?
and thats how the universe began is it? said arthur.
no, said ford, but its a marvellous way to relax.
he reached for his wine glass.
wheres my wine glass? he said.
its on the floor.
ah.
tipping back his chair to look for it, ford collided with the small green waiter
who was approaching the table carrying a portable telephone.
ford excused himself to the waiter explaining that it was because he was ex-
tremely drunk.
the waiter said that that was quite alright and that he perfectly understood.
ford thanked the waiter for his kind indulgence, attempted to tug his forelock,
missed by six inches and slid under the table.

90

chapter 16.

mr zaphod beeblebrox? inquired the waiter.
er, yeah? said zaphod, glancing up from his third steak.
there is a phone call for you.
hey, what?
a phone call, sir.
for me? here? hey, but who knows where i am?
one of his minds raced. the other dawdled lovingly over the food it was still
shovelling in.
excuse me if i carry on, wont you? said his eating head and carried on.
there were now so many people after him hed lost count. he shouldnt have
made such a conspicuous entrance. hell, why not though, he thought. how
do you know youre having fun if theres no one watching you have it?
maybe someone here tipped off the galactic police, said trillian. everyone
saw you come in.
you mean they want to arrest me over the phone? said zaphod, could be.
im a pretty dangerous dude when im concerned.
yeah, said a voice from under the table, you go to pieces so fast people get
hit by the shrapnel.
hey, what is this, judgment day? snapped zaphod.
do we get to see that as well? asked arthur nervously.
im in no hurry, muttered zaphod, ok, so whos the cat on the phone?
he kicked ford. hey get up there, kid, he said to him, i may need you.
i am not, said the waiter, personally acquainted with the metal gentlemen
in question, sir ...
metal?
yes, sir.
did you say metal?
yes, sir. i said that i am not personally acquainted with the metal gentleman
in question ...
ok, carry on.
but i am informed that he has been awaiting your return for a considerable
number of millennia. it seems you left here somewhat precipitately.
left here? said zaphod, are you being strange? we only just arrived here.
indeed, sir, persisted the waiter doggedly, but before you arrived here, sir,
i understand that you left here.
zaphod tried this in one brain, then in the other.
youre saying, he said, that before we arrived here, we left here?
this is going to be a long night, thought the waiter.
precisely, sir, he said.
put your analyst on danger money, baby, advised zaphod.

91

no, wait a minute, said ford, emerging above table level again, where ex-
actly is here?
to be absolutely exact sir, it is frogstar world b.
but we just left there, protested zaphod, we left there and came to the
restaurant at the end of the universe.
yes, sir, said the waiter, feeling that he was now into the home stretch and
running well, the one was constructed on the ruins of the other.
oh, said arthur brightly, you mean weve travelled in time but not in
space.
listen you semi-evolved simian, cut in zaphod, go climb a tree will you?
arthur bristled.
go bang your heads together four-eyes, he advised zaphod.
no, no, the waiter said to zaphod, your monkey has got it right, sir.
arthur stuttered in fury and said nothing apposite, or indeed coherent.
you jumped forward ... i believe five hundred and seventy-six thousand mil-
lion years whilst staying in exactly the same place, explained the waiter. he
smiled. he had a wonderful feeling that he had finally won through against
what had seemed to be insuperable odds.
thats it! said zaphod, i got it. i told the computer to send us to the
nearest place to eat, thats exactly what it did. give or take five hundred and
seventy-six thousand million years, we never moved. neat.
they all agreed this was very neat.
but who, said zaphod, is the cat on the phone?
whatever happened to marvin? said trillian.
zaphod clapped his hands to his heads.
the paranoid android! i left him moping about on frogstar b.
when was this?
well, er, five hundred and seventy-six thousand million years ago i suppose,
said zaphod, hey, er, hand me the rap-rod, plate captain.
the little waiters eyebrows wandered about his forehead in confusion.
i beg your pardon, sir? he said.
the phone, waiter, said zaphod, grabbing it off him. shee, you guys are
so unhip its a wonder your bums dont fall off.
indeed, sir.
hey, marvin, is that you? said zaphod into the phone, how you doing,
kid?
there was a long pause before a thin low voice came up the line.
i think you ought to know im feeling very depressed, it said.
zaphod cupped his hands over the phone.
its marvin, he said.

92

chapter 16.

hey, marvin, he said into the phone again, were having a great time. food,
wine, a little personal abuse and the universe going foom. where can we find
you?
again the pause.
you dont have to pretend to be interested in me you know, said marvin at
last, i know perfectly well im only a menial robot.
ok, ok, said zaphod, but where are you?
reverse primary thrust, marvin, thats what they say to me, open airlock
number three, marvin. marvin, can you pick up that piece of paper? can i
pick up that piece of paper! here i am, brain the size of a planet and they ask
me to ...
yeah, yeah, sympathized zaphod hardly at all.
but im quite used to being humiliated, droned marvin, i can even go and
stick my head in a bucket of water if you like. would you like me to go and
stick my head in a bucket of water? ive got one ready. wait a minute.
er, hey, marvin ... interrupted zaphod, but it was too late. sad little clunks
and gurgles came up the line.
whats he saying? asked trillian.
nothing, said zaphod, he just phoned up to wash his head at us.
there, said marvin, coming back on the line and bubbling a bit, i hope
that gave satisfaction ...
yeah, yeah, said zaphod, now will you please tell us where you are?
im in the car park, said marvin.
the car park? said zaphod, what are you doing there?
parking cars, what else does one do in a car park?
ok, hang in there, well be right down.
in one movement zaphod leapt to his feet, threw down the phone and wrote
hotblack desiato on the bill.
come on guys, he said, marvins in the car park. lets get on down.
whats he doing in the car park? asked arthur.
parking cars, what else? dum dum.
but what about the end of the universe? well miss the big moment.
ive seen it. its rubbish, said zaphod, nothing but a gnab gib.
a what?
opposite of a big bang. come on, lets get zappy.
few of the other diners paid them any attention as they weaved their way
through the restaurant to the exit. their eyes were riveted on the horror of
the skies.
an interesting effect to watch for, max was telling them, is in the upper
left-hand quadrant of the sky, where if you look very carefully you can see the

star system hastromil boiling away into the ultra-violet. anyone here from
hastromil?
there were one or two slightly hesitant cheers from somewhere at the back.
well, said max beaming cheerfully at them, its too late to worry about
whether you left the gas on now.94

chapter 16.



the main reception foyer was almost empty but ford nevertheless weaved his
way through it.
zaphod grasped him firmly by the arm and manoeuvred him into a cubicle
standing to one side of the entrance hall.
what are you doing to him? asked arthur.
sobering him up, said zaphod and pushed a coin into a slot. lights flashed,
gases swirled.
hi, said ford stepping out a moment later, where are we going?
down to the car park, come on.
what about the personnel time teleports? said ford, get us straight back
to the heart of gold.
yeah, but ive cooled on that ship. zarniwoop can have it. i dont want to
play his games. lets see what we can find.
a sirius cybernetics corporation happy vertical people transporter took
them down deep into the substrata beneath the restaurant. they were glad
to see it had been vandalized and didnt try to make them happy as well as
take them down.
at the bottom of the shaft the lift doors opened and a blast of cold stale air
hit them.
the first thing they saw on leaving the lift was a long concrete wall with over
fifty doors in it offering lavatory facilities for all of fifty major lifeforms. nev-
ertheless, like every car park in the galaxy throughout the entire history of
car parks, this car park smelt predominantly of impatience.
they turned a corner and found themselves on a moving catwalk that traversed
a vast cavernous space that stretched off into the dim distance.
it was divided off into bays each of which contained a space ship belonging
to one of the diners upstairs, some smallish and utilitarian mass production
models, others vast shining limoships, the playthings of the very rich.96

chapter 17.

zaphods eyes sparkled with something that may or may not have been avarice
as he passed over them. in fact its best to be clear on this point - avarice is
definitely what it was.
there he is, said trillian, marvin, down there.
they looked where she was pointing. dimly they could see a small metal figure
listlessly rubbing a small rag on one remote corner of a giant silver suncruiser.
at short intervals along the moving catwalk, wide transparent tubes led down
to floor level. zaphod stepped off the catwalk into one and floated gently
downwards. the others followed. thinking back to this later, arthur dent
thought it was the single most enjoyable experience of his travels in the galaxy.
hey, marvin, said zaphod striding over towards to him, hey, kid, are we
pleased to see you.
marvin turned, and in so far as it is possible for a totally inert metal face to
look reproachfully, this is what it did.
no youre not, he said, no one ever is.
suit yourself, said zaphod and turned away to ogle the ships. ford went
with him.
only trillian and arthur actually went up to marvin.
no, really we are, said trillian and patted him in a way that he disliked
intensely, hanging around waiting for us all this time.
five hundred and seventy-six thousand million, three thousand five hundred
and seventy-nine years, said marvin, i counted them.
well, here we are now, said trillian, felling - quite correctly in marvins view
- that it was a slightly foolish thing to say.
the first ten million years were the worst, said marvin, and the second ten
million years, they were the worst too. the third million years i didnt enjoy
at all. after that i went into a bit of decline.
he paused just long enough to make them feel they ought to say something,
and then interrupted.
its the people you meet in this job that really get you down, he said and
paused again.
trillian cleared her throat.
is that ...
the best conversation i had was over forty million years ago, continued mar-
vin.
again the pause.
oh d ...
and that was with a coffee machine.
he waited.
thats a ...

97

you dont like talking to me do you? said marvin in a low desolate tone.
trillian talked to arthur instead.
further down the chamber ford prefect had found something of which he very
much liked the look, several such things in fact.
zaphod, he said in a quiet voice, just look at some of these little star trol-
leys ...
zaphod looked and liked.
the craft they were looking at was in fact pretty small but extraordinary, and
very much a rich kids toy. it was not much to look at. it resembled nothing
so much as a paper dart about twenty feet long made of thin but tough metal
foil. at the rear end was a small horizontal two-man cockpit. it had a tiny
charm- drive engine, which was not capable of moving it at any great speed.
the thing it did have, however, was a heat-sink.
the heat-sink had a mass of some two thousand billion tons and was contained
within a black hole mounted in an electromagnetic field situated half-way along
the length of the ship, and this heat-sink enabled the craft to be manoeuvred
to within a few miles of a yellow sun, there to catch and ride the solar flares
that burst out from its surface.
flare-riding is one of the most exotic and exhilarating sports in existence, and
those who can dare and afford it are amongst the most lionized men in the
galaxy. it is also of course stupefyingly dangerous - those who dont die riding
invariably die of sexual exhaustion at one of the daedalus clubs apres- flare
parties.
ford and zaphod looked and passed on.
and this baby, said ford, the tangerine star buggy with the black sun-
busters ...
again, the star buggy was a small ship - a totally misnamed one in fact, be-
cause the one thing it couldnt manage was interstellar distances. basically
it was a sporty planet hopper dolled up to something it wasnt. nice lines
though. they passed on.
the next one was a big one and thirty yards long - a coach built limoship and
obviously designed with one aim in mind, that of making the beholder sick
with envy. the paintwork and accessory detail clearly said not only am i
rich enough to afford this ship, i am also rich enough not to take it seriously.
it was wonderfully hideous.
just look at it, said zaphod, multi-cluster quark drive, perspulex running
boards. got to be a lazlar lyricon custom job.
he examined every inch.
yes, he said, look, the infra-pink lizard emblem on the neutrino cowling.
lazlars trade mark. the man has no shame.

98

chapter 17.

i was passed by one of these mothers once, out by the axel nebula, said
ford, i was going flat out and this thing just strolled past me, star drive
hardly ticking over. just incredible.
zaphod whistled appreciatively.
ten seconds later, said ford, it smashed straight into the third moon of
jaglan beta.
yeah, right?
amazing looking ship though. looks like a fish, moves like a fish, steers like
a cow.
ford looked round the other side.
hey, come and see, he called out, theres a big mural painted on this side.
a bursting sun - disaster areas trade mark. this must be hotblacks ship.
lucky old bugger. they do this terrible song you know which ends with a
stuntship crashing into the sun. meant to be an amazing spectacle. expensive
in stunt ships though.
zaphods attention however was elsewhere. his attention was riveted on the
ship standing next to hotblack desiatos limo. his mouths hung open.
that, he said, that ... is really bad for the eyes ...
ford looked. he too stood astonished.
it was a ship of classic, simple design, like a flattened salmon, twenty yards
long, very clean, very sleek. there was just one remarkable thing about it.
its so ... black! said ford prefect, you can hardly make out its shape ...
light just seems to fall into it!
zaphod said nothing. he had simply fallen in love.
the blackness of it was so extreme that it was almost impossible to tell how
close you were standing to it.
your eyes just slide off it ... said ford in wonder.
moment. he bit his lip.
zaphod moved forward to it, slowly, like a man possessed - or more accurately
like a man who wanted to possess. his hand reached out to stroke it. his hand
stopped. his hand reached out to stroke it again. his hand stopped again.
come and feel the surface, he said in a hushed voice.
ford put his hand out to feel it. his hand stopped.
you ... you cant ... he said.
see? said zaphod, its just totally frictionless. this must be one mother of
a mover ...
he turned to look at ford seriously. at least, one of his heads did - the other
stayed gazing in awe at the ship.
what do you reckon, ford? he said.
you mean ... er ... ford looked over his shoulder. you mean stroll off with

it was an emotional

99

it? you think we should?
no.
nor do i.
but were going to, arent we?
how can we not?
they gazed a little longer, till zaphod suddenly pulled himself together.
we better shift soon, he said. in a moment or so the universe will have
ended and all the captain creeps will be pouring down here to find their
bourge-mobiles.
zaphod, said ford.
yeah?
how do we do it?
simple, said zaphod. he turned. marvin! he called.
slowly, laboriously, and with a million little clanking and creaking noises that
he had learned to simulate, marvin turned round to answer the summons.
come on over here, said zaphod, weve got a job for you.
marvin trudged towards them.
i wont enjoy it, he said.
yes you will, enthused zaphod, theres a whole new life stretching out ahead
of you.
oh, not another one, groaned marvin.
will you shut up and listen! hissed zaphod, this time theres going to be
excitement and adventure and really wild things.
sounds awful, marvin said.
marvin! all im trying to ask you ...
i suppose you want me to open this spaceship for you?
what? er ... yes. yeah, thats right, said zaphod jumpily. he was keeping
at least three eyes on the entrance. time was short.
well i wish youd just tell me rather than try to engage my enthusiasm, said
marvin, because i havent got one.
he walked on up to the ship, touched it, and a hatchway swung open.
ford and zaphod stared at the opening.
dont mention it, said marvin, oh, you didnt. he trudged away again.
arthur and trillian clustered round.
whats happening? asked arthur.
look at this, said ford, look at the interior of this ship.
weirder and weirder, breathed zaphod.
its black, said ford, everything in it is just totally black ...
in the restaurant, things were fast approaching the moment after which there
wouldnt be any more moments.

100

chapter 17.

all eyes were fixed on the dome, other than those of hotblack desiatos body-
guard, which were looking intently at hotblack desiato, and those of hotblack
desiato himself which the bodyguard had closed out of respect.
the bodyguard leaned forward over the table. had hotblack desiato been
alive, he probably would have deemed this a good moment to lean back, or
even go for a short walk. his bodyguard was not a man which improved with
proximity. on account of his unfortunate condition, however, hotblack desi-
ato remained totally inert.
mr desiato, sir? whispered the bodyguard. whenever he spoke, it looked
as if the muscles on either side of his mouth were clambering over each other
to get out of the way.
mr desiato? can you hear me?
hotblack desiato, quit naturally, said nothing.
hotblack? hissed the bodyguard.
again, quite naturally, hotblack desiato did not reply. supernaturally, how-
ever, he did.
on the table in front of him a wine glass rattled, and a fork rose an inch or so
and tapped against the glass. it settled on the table again.
the bodyguard gave a satisfied grunt.
its time we get going, mr desiato, muttered the bodyguard, dont want
to get caught in the rush, not in your condition. you want to get to the next
gig nice and relaxed. there was a really big audience for it. one of the best.
kakrafoon. five-hundred seventy-six thousand and two million years ago. had
you will have been looking forward to it?
the fork rose again, waggled in a non-committal sort of way and dropped
again.
ah, come on, said the bodyguard, its going to have been great. you
knocked em cold. the bodyguard would have given dr dan streetmentioner
an apoplectic attack.
the black ship going into the sun always gets em, and the new ones a beauty.
be real sorry to see it go. if we get on down there, ill set the black ship au-
topilot and well cruise off in the limo. ok?
the fork tapped once in agreement, and the glass of wine mysteriously emptied
itself.
the bodyguard wheeled hotblack desiatos chair out of the restaurant.
and now, cried max from the centre of the stage, the moment youve all
been waiting for! he flung his arms into the air. behind him, the band went
into a frenzy of percussion and rolling synthochords. max had argued with
them about this but they had claimed it was in their contract that thats what
they would do. his agent would have to sort it out.

101

the skies begin to boil! he cried. nature collapses into the screaming void!
in twenty seconds time, the universe itself will be at an end! see where the
light of infinity bursts in upon us!
the hideous fury of destruction blazed about them - and at that moment a
still small trumpet sounded as from an infinite distance. maxs eyes swivelled
round to glare at the band. none of them seemed to be playing a trumpet.
suddenly a wisp of smoke was swirling and shimmering on the stage next to
him. the trumpet was joined by more trumpets. over five hundred times
max had done this show, and nothing like this had ever happened before. he
drew back in alarm from the swirling smoke, and as he did so, a figure slowly
materialized inside, the figure of an ancient man, bearded, robed and wreathed
in light. in his eyes were stars and on his brow a golden crown.
whats this? whispered max, wild-eyed, whats happening?
at the back of the restaurant the stony-faced party from the church of the
second coming of the great prophet zarquon leapt ecstatically to their feet
chanting and crying.
max blinked in amazement. he threw up his arms to the audience.
a big hand please, ladies and gentlemen, he hollered, for the great prophet
zarquon! he has come! zarquon has come again!
thunderous applause broke out as max strode across the stage and handed
his microphone to the prophet.
zarquon coughed. he peered round at the assembled gathering. the stars in
his eyes blinked uneasily. he handled the microphone with confusion.
er ... he said, hello. er, look, im sorry im a bit late. ive had the most
ghastly time, all sorts of things cropping up at the last moment.
he seemed nervous of the expectant awed hush. he cleared his throat.
er, how are we for time? he said, have i just got a min-
and so the universe ended.

102

chapter 17.



one of the major selling point of that wholly remarkable travel book, the
hitch hikers guide to the galaxy, apart from its relative cheapness and the
fact that it has the words dont panic written in large friendly letters on its
cover, is its compendious and occasionally accurate glossary. the statistics
relating to the geo-social nature of the universe, for instance, are deftly set
out between pages nine hundred and thirty-eight thousand and twenty-four
and nine hundred and thirty-eight thousand and twenty-six; and the simplistic
style in which they are written is partly explained by the fact that the editors,
having to meet a publishing deadline, copied the information off the back of a
packet of breakfast cereal, hastily embroidering it with a few footnoted in order
to avoid prosecution under the incomprehensibly tortuous galactic copyright
laws.
it is interesting to note that a later and wilier editor sent the book backwards
in time through a temporal warp, and then successfully sued the breakfast
cereal company for infringement of the same laws.
here is a sample:
the universe - some information to help you live in it.
1 area: infinite.
the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy offers this definition of the word
infinite.
infinite: bigger than the biggest thing ever and then some. much bigger than
that in fact, really amazingly immense, a totally stunning size, wow, thats
big, time. infinity is just so big that by comparison, bigness itself looks really
titchy. gigantic multiplied by colossal multiplied by staggeringly huge is the
sort of concept were trying to get across here.
2 imports: none.
it is impossible to import things into an infinite area, there being no outside
to import things in from.104

chapter 18.

3 exports: none.
see imports.
4 population: none.
it is known that there are an infinite number of worlds, simply because there is
an infinite amount of space for them to be in. however, not every one of them
is inhabited. therefore, there must be a finite number of inhabited worlds.
any finite number divided by infinity is as near to nothing as makes no odds,
so the average population of all the planets in the universe can be said to be
zero. from this it follows that the population of the whole universe is also
zero, and that any people you may meet from time to time are merely the
products of a deranged imagination.
5 monetary units: none.
in fact there are three freely convertible currencies in the galaxy, but none of
them count. the altairan dollar has recently collapsed, the flaninian pobble
bead is only exchangeable for other flaninian pobble beads, and the triganic
pu has its own very special problems. its exchange rate of eight ningis to one
pu is simple enough, but since a ningi is a triangular rubber coin six thousand
eight hundred miles across each side, no one has ever collected enough to own
one pu. ningis are not negotiable currency because the galactibanks refuse
to deal in fiddling small change. from this basic premise it is very simple to
prove that the galactibanks are also the product of a deranged imagination.
6 art: none.
the function of art is to hold the mirror up to nature, and there simply isnt
a mirror big enough - see point one.
7 sex: none.
well, in fact there is an awful lot of this, largely because of the total lack of
money, trade, banks, art, or anything else that might keep all the non-existent
people of the universe occupied.
however, it is not worth embarking on a long discussion of it now because
it really is terribly complicated. for further information see guide chapters
seven, nine, ten, eleven, fourteen, sixteen, seventeen, nineteen, twenty-one to
eighty-four inclusive, and in fact most of the rest of the guide.



the restaurant continued existing, but everything else had stopped. tempo-
ral relastatics held it and protected it in a nothingness that wasnt merely a
vacuum, it was simply nothing - there was nothing in which a vacuum could
be said to exist.
the force-shielded dome had once again been rendered opaque, the party was
over, the diners were leaving, zarquon had vanished along with the rest of
the universe, the time turbines were preparing to pull the restaurant back
across the brink of time in readiness for the lunch sitting, and max quordle-
pleen was back in his small curtained dressing room trying to raise his agent
on the tempophone.
in the car park stood the black ship, closed and silent.
in to the car park came the late mr hotblack desiato, propelled along the
moving catwalk by his bodyguard.
they descended one of the tubes. as they approached the limoship a hatchway
swung down from its side, engaged the wheels of the wheelchair and drew it
inside. the bodyguard followed, and having seen his boss safely connected up
to his death-support system, moved up to the small cockpit. here he operated
the remote control system which activated the autopilot in the black ship lying
next to the limo, thus causing great relief to zaphod beeblebrox who had been
trying to start the thing for over ten minutes.
the black ship glided smoothly forward out of its bay, turned, and moved
down the central causeway swiftly and quietly. at the end it accelerated
rapidly, flung itself into the temporal launch chamber and began the long
journey back into the distant past.
the milliways lunch menu quotes, by permission, a passage from the hitch
hikers guide to the galaxy. the passage is this:
the history of every major galactic civilization tends to pass through three
distinct and recognizable phases, those of survival, inquiry and sophistication,106

chapter 19.

otherwise known as the how, why and where phases.
for instance, the first phase is characterized by the question how can we
eat?, the second by the question why do we eat? and the third by the
question, where shall we have lunch?
the menu goes on to suggest that milliways, the restaurant at the end of the
universe, would be a very agreeable and sophisticated answer to that third
question.
what it doesnt go on to say is that though it will usually take a large civi-
lization many thousands of years to pass through the how, why and where
phases, small social groupings under stressful conditions can pass through them
with extreme rapidity.
how are we doing? said arthur dent.
badly, said ford prefect.
where are we going? said trillian.
i dont know, said zaphod beeblebrox.
why not? demanded arthur dent.
shut up, suggested zaphod beeblebrox and ford prefect.
basically, what youre trying to say, said arthur dent, ignoring this sugges-
tion, is that were out of control.
the ship was rocking and swaying sickeningly as ford and zaphod tried to
wrest control from the autopilot. the engined howled and whined like tired
children in a supermarket.
its the wild colour scheme that freaks me, said zaphod whose love affair
with this ship had lasted almost three minutes into the flight, every time you
try to operate on of these weird black controls that are labelled in black on a
black background, a little black light lights up black to let you know youve
done it. what is this? some kind of galactic hyperhearse?
the walls of the swaying cabin were also black, the ceiling was black, the seats
- which were rudimentary since the only important trip this ship was designed
for was supposed to be unmanned - were black, the control panel was black, the
instruments were black, the little screws that held them in place were black,
the thin tufted nylon floor covering was black, and when they had lifted up a
corner of it they had discovered that the foam underlay also was black.
perhaps whoever designed it had eyes that responded to different wave-
lengths, offered trillian.
or didnt have much imagination, muttered arthur.
perhaps, said marvin, he was feeling very depressed.
in fact, though they werent to know it, the decor had been chosen in honour
of its owners sad, lamented, and tax-deductible condition.
the ship gave a particularly sickening lurch.

107

take it easy, pleaded arthur, youre making me space sick.
time sick, said ford, were plummeting backwards through time.
thank you, said arthur, now i think i really am going to be ill.
go ahead, said zaphod, we could do with a little colour about this place.
this is meant to be a polite after-dinner conversation is it? snapped arthur.
zaphod left the controls for ford to figure out, and lurched over to arthur.
look, earthman, he said angrily, youve got a job to do, right? the ques-
tion to the ultimate answer, right?
what, that thing? said arthur, i thought wed forgotten about that.
not me, baby. like the mice said, its worth a lot of money in the right
quarters. and its all locked up in that head thing of yours.
yes but ...
but nothing! think about it. the meaning of life! we get our fingers on
that we can hold every shrink in the galaxy up to ransom, and thats worth a
bundle. i owe mine a mint.
arthur took a deep breath without much enthusiasm.
alright, he said, but where do we start? how should i know? they say the
ultimate answer or whatever is forty-two, how am i supposed to know what
the question is? it could be anything. i mean, whats six times seven?
zaphod looked at him hard for a moment. then his eyes blazed with excite-
ment.
forty-two! he cried.
arthur wiped his palm across his forehead.
yes, he said patiently, i know that.
zaphods faces fell.
im just saying that the question could be anything at all, said arthur, and
i dont see how i am meant to know.
because, hissed zaphod, you were there when your planet did the big
firework.
we have a thing on earth ... began arthur.
had, corrected zaphod.
... called tact. oh never mind. look, i just dont know.
a low voice echoed dully round the cabin.
i know, said marvin.
ford called out from the controls he was still fighting a losing battle with.
stay out of this marvin, he said, this is organism talk.
its printed in the earthmans brainwave patterns, continued marvin, but
i dont suppose youll be very interested in knowing that.
you mean, said arthur, you mean you can see into my mind?
yes, said marvin.

108

chapter 19.

arthur stared in astonishment.
and ...? he said.
it amazes me how you can manage to live in anything that small.
ah, said arthur, abuse.
yes, confirmed marvin.
ah, ignore him, said zaphod, hes only making it up.
making it up? said marvin, swivelling his head in a parody of astonishment,
why should i want to make anything up? lifes bad enough as it is without
wanting to invent any more of it.
marvin, said trillian in the gentle, kindly voice that only she was still capa-
ble of assuming in talking to this misbegotten creature, if you knew all along,
why then didnt you tell us?
marvins head swivelled back to her.
you didnt ask, he said simply.
well, were asking you now, metal man, said ford, turning round to look at
him.
at that moment the ship suddenly stopped rocking and swaying, the engine
pitch settled down to a gentle hum.
hey, ford, said zaphod, that sounds good. have you worked out the con-
trols of this boat?
no, said ford, i just stopped fiddling with them. i reckon we just go to
wherever this ship is going and get off it fast.
yeah, right, said zaphod.
i could tell you werent really interested, murmured marvin to himself and
slumped into a corner and switched himself off.
trouble is, said ford, that the one instrument in this while ship that is
giving any reading is worrying me. if it is what i think it is, and if its saying
what i think its saying, then weve already gone too far back into the past.
maybe as much as two million years before our own time.
zaphod shrugged.
time is bunk, he said.
i wonder who this ship belongs to anyway, said arthur.
me, said zaphod.
no. who it really belongs to.
really me, insisted zaphod, look, property is theft, right? therefore theft
is property. therefore this ship is mine, ok?
tell the ship that, said arthur.
zaphod strode over to the console.
ship, he said, banging on the panels, this is your new owner speaking to
...

109

he got no further. several things happened at once.
the ship dropped out fo time travel mode and re-emerged into real space.
all the controls on the console, which had been shut down for the time trip
now lit up.
a large vision screen above the console winked into life revealing a wide
starscape and a single very large sun dead ahead of them.
none of these things, however, were responsible for the fact that zaphod was
at the same moment hurled bodily backwards against the rear of the cabin, as
were all the others.
they were hurled back by a single thunderous clap of noise that thuddered out
of the monitor speakers surrounding the vision screen.

110

chapter 19.



down on the dry, red world of kakrafoon, in the middle of the vast rudlit
desert, the stage technicians were testing the sound system.
that is to say, the sound system was in the desert, not the stage technicians.
they had retreated to the safety of disaster areas giant control ship which
hung in orbit some four hundred miles above the surface of the planet, and
they were testing the sound system from there. anyone within five miles of
the speaker silos wouldnt have survived the tuning up.
if arthur dent had been within five miles of the speaker silos then his expiring
thought would have been that in both size and shape the sound rig closely re-
sembled manhattan. risen out of the silos, the neutron phase speaker stacks
towered monstrously against the sky, obscuring the banks of plutonium reac-
tors and seismic amps behind them.
buried deep in concrete bunkers beneath the city of speakers lay the instru-
ments that the musicians would control from their ship, the massive photon-
ajuitar, the bass detonator and the megabang drum complex.
it was going to be a noisy show.
aboard the giant control ship, all was activity and bustle. hotblack desiatos
limoship, a mere tadpole beside it, had arrived and docked, and the lamented
gentleman was being transported down the high vaulted corridors to meet the
medium who was going to interpret his psychic impulses on to the ajuitar key-
board.
a doctor, a logician and a marine biologist had also just arrived, flown in at
phenomenal expense from maximegalon to try to reason with the lead singer
who had locked himself in the bathroom with a bottle of pills and was refusing
to come out till it could be proved conclusively to him that he wasnt a fish.
the bass player was busy machine-gunning his bedroom and the drummer was
nowhere on board.
frantic inquiries led to the discovery that he was standing on a beach on112

chapter 20.

santraginus v over a hundred light years away where, he claimed, he had been
happy over half an hour now and had found a small stone that would be his
friend.
the bands manager was profoundly relieved. it meant that for the seventeenth
time on this tour the drums would be played by a robot and that therefore the
timing of the cymbalistics would be right.
the sub-ether was buzzing with the communications of the stage technicians
testing the speaker channels, and this it was that was being relayed to the
interior of the black ship.
its dazed occupants lay against the back wall of the cabin, and listened to the
voices on the monitor speakers.
ok, channel nine on power, said a voice, testing channel fifteen ...
another thumping crack of noise walloped through the ship.
channel fifteen aok, said another voice.
a third voice cut in.
the black stunt ship is now in position, it said, its looking good. gonna
be a great sundive. stage computer on line?
a computer voice answered.
on line, it said.
take control of the black ship.
black ship locked into trajectory programme, on standby.
testing channel twenty.
zaphod leaped across the cabin and switched frequencies on the sub-ether
receiver before the next mind-pulverizing noise hit them. he stood there quiv-
ering.
what, said trillian in a small quiet voice, does sundive mean?
it means, said marvin, that the ship os going to dive into the sun. sun
... dive.
its very simple to understand. what do you expect if you steal
hotblack desiatos stunt ship?
how do you know ... said zaphod in a voice that would make a vegan snow
lizard feel chilly, that this is hotblack desiatos stuntship?
simple, said marvin, i parked it for him.
the why ... didnt ... you ... tell us!
you said you wanted excitement and adventure and really wild things.
this is awful, said arthur unnecessarily in the pause which followed.
thats what i said, confirmed marvin.
on a different frequency, the sub-ether receiver had picked up a public broad-
cast, which now echoed round the cabin.
... fine weather for the concert here this afternoon. im standing here in front
of the stage, the reporter lied, in the middle of the rudlit desert, and with

113

the aid of hyperbinoptic glasses i can just about make out the huge audience
cowering there on the horizon all around me. behind me the speaker stacks rise
like a sheer cliff face, and high above me the sun is shining away and doesnt
know whats going to hit it. the environmentalist lobby do know whats going
to hit it, and they claim that the concert will cause earthquakes, tidal waves,
hurricanes, irreparable damage to the atmosphere, and all the usual things
that environmentalists usually go on about.
but ive just had a report that a representative of disaster area met with
the environmentalists at lunchtime, and had them all shot, so nothing now lies
in the way of ...
zaphod switched it off. he turned to ford.
you know what im thinking? he said.
i think so, said ford.
tell me what you think im thinking.
i think youre thinking its time we get off this ship.
i think youre right, said zaphod.
i think youre right, said ford.
how? said arthur.
quiet, said ford and zaphod, were thinking.
so this is it, said arthur, were going to die.
i wish youd stop saying that, said ford.
it is worth repeating at this point the theories that ford had come up with, on
his first encounter with human beings, to account for their peculiar habit of
continually stating and restating the very very obvious, as it its a nice day,
or youre very tall, or so this is it, were going to die.
his first theory was that if human beings didnt keep exercising their lips, their
mouths probably seized up.
after a few months of observation he had come up with a second theory, which
was this - if human beings dont keep exercising their lips, their brains start
working.
in fact, this second theory is more literally true of the belcebron people of
kakrafoon.
the belcebron people used to cause great resentment and insecurity amongst
neighboring races by being one of the most enlightened, accomplished, and
above all quiet civilizations in the galaxy.
as a punishment for this behaviour, which was held to be offensively self righ-
teous and provocative, a galactic tribunal inflicted on them that most cruel
of all social diseases, telepathy. consequently, in order to prevent themselves
broadcasting every slightest thought that crossed their minds to anyone within
a five mile radius, they now have to talk very loudly and continuously about

114

chapter 20.

the weather, their little aches and pains, the match this afternoon and what a
noisy place kakrafoon had suddenly become.
another method of temporarily blotting out their minds is to play host to a
disaster area concert.
the timing of the concert was critical.
the ship had to begin its dive before the concert began in order to hit the sun
six minutes and thirty-seven seconds before the climax of the song to which it
related, so that the light of the solar flares had time to travel out to kakrafoon.
the ship had already been diving for several minutes by the time that ford
prefect had completed his search of the other compartments of the black ship.
he burst back into the cabin.
the sun of kakrafoon loomed terrifyingly large on the vision screen, its blaz-
ing white inferno of fusing hydrogen nuclei growing moment by moment as
the ship plunged onwards, unheeding the thumping and banging of zaphods
hands on the control panel. arthur and trillian had the fixed expressions of
rabbits on a night road who think that the best way of dealing with approach-
ing headlights is to stare them out.
zaphod span round, wild-eyed.
ford, he said, how many escape capsules are there?
none, said ford.
zaphod gibbered.
did you count them? he yelled.
twice, said ford, did you manage to raise the stage crew on the radio?
yeah, said zaphod, bitterly, i said there were a whole bunch of people on
board, and they said to say hi to everybody.
ford goggled.
didnt you tell them who we were?
oh yeah. they said it was a great honour. that and something about a
restaurant bill and my executors.
ford pushed arthur aside and leaned forward over the control console.
does none of this function? he said savagely.
all overridden.
smash the autopilot.
find it first. nothing connects.
there was a moments cold silence.
arthur was stumbling round the back of the cabin. he stopped suddenly.
incidentally, he said, what does teleport mean?
another moment passed.
slowly, the others turned to face him.
probably the wrong moment to ask, said arthur, its just i remember hear-

115

ing you use the word a short while ago and i only bring it up because ...
where, said ford prefect quietly, does it say teleport?
well, just over here in fact, said arthur, pointing at a dark control box in the
rear of the cabin, just under the word emergency, above the word system
and beside the sign saying out of order.
in the pandemonium that instantly followed, the only action to follow was that
of ford prefect lunging across the cabin to the small black box that arthur
had indicated and stabbing repeatedly at the single small black button set into
it.
a six-foot square panel slid open beside it revealing a compartment which re-
sembled a multiple shower unit that had found a new function in life as an
electricians junk store. half- finished wiring hung from the ceiling, a jumble
of abandoned components lay strewn on the floor, and the programming panel
lolled out of the cavity in the wall into which it should have been secured.
a junior disaster area accountant, visiting the shipyard where this ship was
being constructed, had demanded to know of the works foreman why the hell
they were fitting an extremely expensive teleport into a ship which only had
one important journey to make, and that unmanned. the foreman had ex-
plained that the teleport was available at a ten per cent discount and the ac-
countant had explained that this was immaterial; the foreman had explained
that it was the finest, most powerful and sophisticated teleport that money
could buy and the accountant had explained that the money did not wish to
buy it; the foreman had explained that people would still need to enter and
leave the ship and the accountant had explained that the ship sported a per-
fectly serviceable door; the foreman had explained that the accountant could
go and boil his head and the accountant had explained to the foreman that
the thing approaching him rapidly from his left was a knuckle sandwich. after
the explanations had been concluded, work was discontinued on the teleport
which subsequently passed unnoticed on the invoice as sund. explns. at five
times the price.
hells donkeys, muttered zaphod as he and ford attempted to sort through
the tangle of wiring.
after a moment or so ford told him to stand back. he tossed a coin into the
teleport and jiggled a switch on the lolling control panel. with a crackle and
spit of light, the coin vanished.
that much of it works, said ford, however, there is no guidance system. a
matter transference teleport without guidance programming could put you ...
well, anywhere.
the sun of kakrafoon loomed huge on the screen.
who cares, said zaphod, we go where we go.

116

chapter 20.

and, said ford, there is no autosystem. we couldnt all go. someone would
have to stay and operate it.
a solemn moment shuffled past. the sun loomed larger and larger.
hey, marvin kid, said zaphod brightly, how you doing?
very badly i suspect, muttered marvin.
a shortish while later, the concert on kakrafoon reached an unexpected cli-
max.
the black ship with its single morose occupant had plunged on schedule into
the nuclear furnace of the sun. massive solar flares licked out from it millions
of miles into space, thrilling and in a few cases spilling the dozen or so flare
riders who had been coasting close to the surface of the sun in anticipation of
the moment.
moments before the flare light reached kakrafoon the pounding desert cracked
along a deep faultline. a huge and hitherto undetected underground river ly-
ing far beneath the surface gushed to the surface to be followed seconds later
by the eruption of millions of tons of boiling lava that flowed hundreds of feet
into the air, instantaneously vaporizing the river both above and below the
surface in an explosion that echoed to the far side of the world and back again.
those - very few - who witnessed the event and survived swear that the whole
hundred thousand square miles of the desert rose into the air like a mile-thick
pancake, flipped itself over and fell back down. at that precise moment the
solar radiation from the flares filtered through the clouds of vaporized water
and struck the ground.
a year later, the hundred thousand square mile desert was thick with flowers.
the structure of the atmosphere around the planet was subtly altered. the
sun blazed less harshly in the summer, the cold bit less bitterly in the winter,
pleasant rain fell more often, and slowly the desert world of kakrafoon became
a paradise. even the telepathic power with which the people of kakrafoon had
been cursed was permanently dispersed by the force of the explosion.
a spokesman for disaster area - the one who had had all the environmentalists
shot - was later quoted as saying that it had been a good gig.
many people spoke movingly of the healing powers of music. a few sceptical
scientists examined the records of the events more closely, and claimed that
they had discovered faint vestiges of a vast artificially induced improbability
field drifting in from a nearby region of space.



arthur woke up and instantly regretted it. hangovers hed had, but never
anything on this scale. this was it, this was the big one, this was the ultimate
pits. matter transference beams, he decided, were not as much fun as, say, a
good solid kick in the head.
being for the moment unwilling to move on account of a dull stomping throb
he was experiencing, he lay a while and thought. the trouble with most forms
of transport, he thought, is basically one of them not being worth all the
bother. on earth - when there had been an earth, before it was demolished
to make way for a new hyperspace bypass - the problem had been with cars.
the disadvantages involved in pulling lots of black sticky slime from out of the
ground where it had been safely hidden out of harms way, turning it into tar
to cover the land with, smoke to fill the air with and pouring the rest into the
sea, all seemed to outweigh the advantages of being able to get more quickly
from one place to another - particularly when the place you arrived at had
probably become, as a result of this, very similar to the place you had left, i.e.
covered with tar, full of smoke and short of fish.
and what about matter transference beams? any form of transport which
involved tearing you apart atom by atom, flinging those atoms through the
sub-ether, and then jamming them back together again just when they were
getting their first taste of freedom for years had to be bad news.
many people had thought exactly this before arthur dent and had even gone
to the lengths of writing songs about it. here is one that used regularly to be
chanted by huge crowds outside the sirius cybernetics corporation teleport
systems factory on happi-werld iii:
aldebarans great, ok,
algols pretty neat,
betelgeuses pretty girls,
will knock you off your feet.118

chapter 21.

theyll do anything you like,
real fast and then real slow,
but if you have to take me apart to get me there,
then i dont want to go.
singing,
take me apart, take me apart,
what a way to roam,
and if you have to take me apart to get me there,
id rather stay at home.
sirius is paved with gold
so ive heard it said
by nuts who then go on to say
see tau before youre dead.
ill gladly take the high road
or even take the low,
but if you have to take me apart to get me there,
then i, for one, wont go.
singing,
take me apart, take me apart, you must be off your head,
and if you try to take me apart to get me there,
ill stay right here in bed.
i teleported home one night,
with ron and sid and meg,
ron stole meggies heart away,
and i got sidneys leg.
arthur felt the waves of pain slowly receding, though he was still aware of a
dull stomping throb. slowly, carefully, he stood up.
can you hear a dull stomping throb? said ford prefect.
arthur span round and wobbled uncertainly. ford prefect was approaching
looking red eyed and pasty.
where are we? gasped arthur.
ford looked around. they were standing in a long curving corridor which
stretched out of sight in both directions. the outer steel wall - which was
painted in that sickly shade of pale green which they use in schools, hospitals
and mental asylums to keep the inmates subdued - curved over the tops of
their heads where it met the inner perpendicular wall which, oddly enough
was covered in dark brown hessian wall weave. the floor was of dark green
ribbed rubber.
ford moved over to a very thick dark transparent panel set in the outer wall. it
was several layers deep, yet through it he could see pinpoints of distant stars.

119

i think were in a spaceship of some kind, he said.
down the corridor came the sound of a dull stomping throb.
trillian? called arthur nervously, zaphod?
ford shrugged.
nowhere about, he said, ive looked. they could be anywhere. an unpro-
grammed teleport can throw you light years in any direction. judging by the
way i feel i should think weve travelled a very long way indeed.
how do you feel?
bad.
do you think theyre ...
where they are, how they are, theres no way we can know and no way we
can do anything about it. do what i do.
what?
dont think about it.
arthur turned this thought over in his mind, reluctantly saw the wisdom of it,
tucked it up and put it away. he took a deep breath.
footsteps! exclaimed ford suddenly.
where?
that noise. that stomping throb. pounding feet. listen!
arthur listened. the noise echoed round the corridor at them from an inde-
terminate distance. it was the muffled sound of pounding footsteps, and it
was noticeably louder.
lets move, said ford sharply. they both moved - in opposite directions.
not that way, said ford, thats where theyre coming from.
no its not, said arthur, theyre coming from that way.
theyre not, theyre ...
they both stopped. they both turned. they both listened intently. they
both agreed with each other. they both set off into opposite directions again.
fear gripped them.
from both directions the noise was getting louder.
a few yards to their left another corridor ran at right angles to the inner wall.
they ran to it and hurried along it.
it was dark, immensely long and, as
they passed down it, gave them the impression that it was getting colder and
colder. other corridors gave off it to the left and right, each very dark and
each subjecting them to sharp blasts of icy air as they passed.
they stopped for a moment in alarm. the further down the corridor they
went, the louder became the sound of pounding feet.
they pressed themselves back against the cold wall and listened furiously.
the cold, the dark and the drumming of disembodied feet was getting to them
badly. ford shivered, partly with the cold, but partly with the memory of

120

chapter 21.

stories his favourite mother used to tell him when he was a mere slip of a
betelgeusian, ankle high to an arcturan megagrasshopper: stories of dead
ships, haunted hulks that roamed restlessly round the obscurer regions of deep
space infested with demons or the ghosts of forgotten crews; stories too of in-
cautious travellers who found and entered such ships; stories of ... - then ford
remembered the brown hessian wall weave in the first corridor and pulled him-
self together. however ghosts and demons may choose to decorate their death
hulks, he thought to himself, he would lay any money you liked it wasnt with
hessian wall weave. he grasped arthur by the arm.
back the way we came, he said firmly and they started to retrace their steps.
a moment later they leap like startled lizards down the nearest corridor junc-
tion as the owners of the drumming feet suddenly hove into view directly in
front of them.
hidden behind the corner they goggled in amazement as about two dozen
overweight men and women pounded past them in track suits panting and
wheezing in a manner that would make a heart surgeon gibber.
ford prefect stared after them.
joggers! he hissed, as the sound of their feet echoed away up and down the
network of corridors.
joggers? whispered arthur dent.
joggers, said ford prefect with a shrug.
the corridor they were concealed in was not like the others. it was very short,
and ended at a large steel door. ford examined it, discovered the opening
mechanism and pushed it wide.
the first thing that hit their eyes was what appeared to be a coffin.
and the next four thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine things that hit their
eyes were also coffins.



the vault was low ceilinged, dimly lit and gigantic. at the far end, about three
hundred yards away an archway let through to what appeared to be a similar
chamber, similarly occupied.
ford prefect let out a low whistle as he stepped down on to the floor of the
vault.
wild, he said.
whats so great about dead people? asked arthur, nervously stepping down
after him.
dunno, said ford, lets find out shall we?
on closer inspection the coffins seemed to be more like sarcophagi. they stood
about waist high and were constructed of what appeared to be white marble,
which is almost certainly what it was - something that only appeared to be
white marble. the tops were semi-translucent, and through them could dimly
be perceived the features of their late and presumably lamented occupants.
they were humanoid, and had clearly left the troubles of whatever world it
was they came from far behind them, but beyond that little else could be dis-
cerned.
rolling slowly round the floor between the sarcophagi was a heavy, oily white
gas which arthur at first thought might be there to give the place a little
atmosphere until he discovered that it also froze his ankles. the sarcophagi
too were intensely cold to the touch.
ford suddenly crouched down beside one of them. he pulled a corner of his
towel out of his satchel and started to rub furiously at something.
look, theres a plaque on this one, he explained to arthur, its frosted
over.
he rubbed the frost clear and examined the engraved characters. to arthur
they looked like the footprints of a spider that had had one too many of what-
ever it is that spiders have on a night out, but ford instantly recognized an122

chapter 22.

early form of galactic eezeereed.
it says golgafrincham ark fleet, ship b, hold seven, telephone sanitizer
second class - and a serial number.
a telephone sanitizer? said arthur, a dead telephone sanitizer?
best kind.
but whats he doing here?
ford peered through the top at the figure within.
not a lot, he said, and suddenly flashed one of those grins of his which
always made people think hed been overdoing things recently and should try
to get some rest.
he scampered over to another sarcophagus. a moments brisk towel work and
he announced:
this ones a dead hairdresser. hoopy!
the next sarcophagus revealed itself to be the last resting place of an ad-
vertising account executive; the one after that contained a second-hand car
salesman, third class.
an inspection hatch let into the floor suddenly caught fords attention, and
he squatted down to unfasten it, thrashing away at the clouds of freezing gas
that threatened to envelope him.
a thought occurred to arthur.
if these are just coffins, he said, why are they kept so cold?
or, indeed, why are they kept anyway, said ford tugging the hatchway open.
the gas poured down through it. why in fact is anyone going to all the trou-
ble and expense of carting five thousand dead bodies through space?
ten thousand, said arthur, pointing at the archway through which the next
chamber was dimly visible.
ford stuck his head down through the floor hatchway. he looked up again.
fifteen thousand, he said, theres another lot down there.
fifteen million, said a voice.
thats a lot, said ford, a lot a lot.
turn around slowly, barked the voice, and put your hands up. any other
move and i blast you into tiny tiny bits.
hello? said ford, turning round slowly, putting his hands up and not mak-
ing any other move.
why, said arthur dent, isnt anyone ever pleased to see us?
standing silhouetted in the doorway through which they had entered the vault
was the man who wasnt pleased to see them. his displeasure was communi-
cated partly by the barking hectoring quality of his voice and partly by the
viciousness with which he waved a long silver kill-o-zap gun at them. the
designer of the gun had clearly not been instructed to beat about the bush.

123

make it evil, hed been told. make it totally clear that this gun has a right
end and a wrong end. make it totally clear to anyone standing at the wrong
end that things are going badly for them. if that means sticking all sort of
spikes and prongs and blackened bits all over it then so be it. this is not a
gun for hanging over the fireplace or sticking in the umbrella stand, it is a gun
for going out and making people miserable with.
ford and arthur looked at the gun unhappily.
the man with the gun moved from the door and circled round them. as he
came into the light they could see his black and gold uniform on which the
buttons were so highly polished that they shone with an intensity that would
have made an approaching motorist flash his lights in annoyance.
he gestured at the door.
out, he said. people who can supply that amount of fire power dont need
to supply verbs as well. ford and arthur went out, closely followed by the
wrong end of the kill-o-zap gun and the buttons.
turning into the corridor they were jostled by twenty-four oncoming joggers,
now showered and changed, who swept on past them into the vault. arthur
turned to watch them in confusion.
move! screamed their captor.
arthur moved.
ford shrugged and moved.
in the vault the joggers went to twenty-four empty sarcophagi along the side
wall, opened them, climbed in, and fell into twenty-four dreamless sleeps.

124

chapter 22.



er, captain ...
yes, number one?
just heard a sort of report thingy from number two.
oh, dear.
high up in the bridge of the ship, the captain stared out into the infinite
reaches of space with mild irritation. from where he reclined beneath a wide
domed bubble he could see before and above them the vast panorama of stars
through which they were moving - a panorama that had thinned out noticably
during the course of the voyage. turning and looking backwards, over the
vast two-mile bulk of the ship he could see the far denser mass of stars behind
them which seemed to form almost a solid band. this was the view through
the galactic centre from which they were travelling, and indeed had been trav-
elling for years, at a speed that he couldnt quite remember at the moment,
but he knew it was terribly fast. it was something approaching the speed of
something or other, or was it three times the speed of something else? jolly
impressive anyway. he peered into the bright distance behind the ship, looking
for something. he did this every few minutes or so, but never found what he
was looking for. he didnt let it worry him though. the scientist chaps had
been very insistent that everything was going to be perfectly alright providing
nobody panicked and everybody got on and did their bit in an orderly fashion.
he wasnt panicking. as far as he was concerned everything was going splen-
didly. he dabbed at his shoulder with a large frothy sponge. it crept back
into his mind that he was feeling mildly irritated about something. now what
was all that about? a slight cough alerted him to the fact that the ships first
officer was still standing nearby.
nice chap, number one. not of the very brightest, had the odd spot of
difficulty doing up his shoe laces, but jolly good officer material for all that.
the captain wasnt a man to kick a chap when he was bending over trying to126

chapter 23.

do up his shoe laces, however long it took him. not like that ghastly number
two, strutting about all over the place, polishing his buttons, issuing reports
every hour: ships still moving, captain. still on course, captain. oxy-
gen levels still being maintained, captain. give it a miss, was the captains
vote. ah yes, that was the thing that had been irritating him. he peered down
at number one.
yes, captain, he was shouting something or other about having found some
prisoners ...
the captain thought about this. seemed pretty unlikely to him, but he wasnt
one to stand in his officers way.
well, perhaps thatll keep him happy for a bit, he said, hes always wanted
some.
ford prefect and arthur dent trudged onwards up the ships apparently end-
less corridors. number two marched behind them barking the occasional order
about not making any false moves or trying any funny stuff. they seemed to
have passed at least a mile of continuous brown hessian wall weave. finally
they reached a large steel door which slid open when number two shouted at
it.
they entered.
to the eyes of ford prefect and arthur dent, the most remarkable thing about
the ships bridge was not the fifty foot diameter hemispherical dome which cov-
ered it, and through which the dazzling display of stars shone down on them:
to people who have eaten at the restaurant at the end of the universe, such
wonders are commonplace. nor was it the bewildering array of instruments
that crowded the long circumferential wall around them. to arthur this was
exactly what spaceships were traditionally supposed to look like, and to ford it
looked thoroughly antiquated: it confirmed his suspicions that disaster areas
stuntship had taken them back at least a million, if not two million, years be-
fore their own time.
no, the thing that really caught them off balance was the bath.
the bath stood on a six foot pedestal of rough hewn blue water crystal and
was of a baroque monstrosity not often seen outside the maximegalon museum
of diseased imaginings. an intestinal jumble of plumbing had been picked out
in gold leaf rather than decently buried at midnight in an unmarked grave; the
taps and shower attachment would have made a gargoyle jump.
as the dominant centrepiece of a starship bridge it was terribly wrong, and
it was with the embittered air of a man who knew this that number two
approached it.
captain, sir! he shouted through clenched teeth - a difficult trick but hed
had years during which to perfect it.

127

a large genial face and a genial foam covered arm popped up above the rim
of the monstrous bath.
ah, hello, number two, said the captain, waving a cheery sponge, having
a nice day?
number two snapped even further to attention than he already was.
i have brought you the prisoners i located in freezer bay seven, sir! he
yapped.
ford and arthur coughed in confusion.
er ... hello, they said.
the captain beamed at them. so number two had really found some prison-
ers. well, good for him, thought the captain, nice to see a chap doing what
hes best at.
oh, hello there, he said to them, excuse me not getting up, having a quick
bath. well, jynnan tonnyx all round then. look in the fridge number one.
certainly sir.
it is a curious fact, and one to which no one knows quite how much importance
to attach, that something like 85% of all known worlds in the galaxy, be they
primitive or highly advanced, have invented a drink called jynnan tonnyx, or
gee-nn-tn-ix, or jinond-o-nicks, or any one of a thousand or more variations
on the same phonetic theme. the drinks themselves are not the same, and
vary between the sivolvian chinanto/mnigs which is ordinary water server
at slightly above room temperature, and the gagrakackan tzjin-anthony-ks
which kills cows at a hundred paces; and in fact the one common factor be-
tween all of them, beyond the fact that the names sound the same, is that they
were all invented and named before the worlds concerned made contact with
any other worlds.
what can be made of this fact? it exists in total isolation. as far as any theory
of structural linguistics is concerned it is right off the graph, and yet it per-
sists. old structural linguists get very angry when young structural linguists
go on about it. young structural linguists get deeply excited about it and stay
up late at night convinced that they are very close to something of profound
importance, and end up becoming old structural linguists before their time,
getting very angry with the young ones. structural linguistics is a bitterly
divided and unhappy discipline, and a large number of its practitioners spend
too many nights drowning their problems in ouisghian zodahs.
number two stood before the captains bathtub trembling with frustration.
dont you want to interrogate the prisoners sir? he squealed.
the captain peered at him in bemusement.
why on golgafrincham should i want to do that? he asked.
to get information out of them, sir! to find out why they came here!

128

chapter 23.

oh no, no, no, said the captain, i expect they just dropped in for a quick
jynnan tonnyx, dont you?
but sir, theyre my prisoners! i must interrogate them!
the captain looked at them doubtfully.
oh all right, he said, if you must. ask them what they want to drink.
a hard cold gleam came into number twos eyes. he advanced slowly on ford
prefect and arthur dent.
all right, you scum, he growled, you vermin ... he jabbed ford with the
kill-o-zap gun.
steady on, number two, admonished the captain gently.
what do you want to drink!!! number two screamed.
well the jynnan tonnyx sounds very nice to me, said ford, what about
you arthur?
arthur blinked.
what? oh, er, yes, he said.
with ice or without? bellowed number two.
oh, with please, said ford.
lemon??!!
yes please, said ford, and do you have any of those little biscuits? you
know, the cheesy ones?
im asking the questions!!!! howled number two, his body quaking with
apoplectic fury.
er, number two ... said the captain softly.
sir?!
push off, would you, theres a good chap. im trying to have a relaxing bath.
number twos eyes narrowed and became what are known in the shouting and
killing people trade as cold slits, the idea presumably being to give your op-
ponent the impression that you have lost your glasses or are having difficulty
keeping awake. why this is frightening is an, as yet, unresolved problem.
he advanced on the captain, his (number twos) mouth a thin hard line.
again, tricky to know why this is understood as fighting behaviour. if, whilst
wandering through the jungle of traal, you were suddenly to come upon the
fabled ravenous bugblatter beast, you would have reason to be grateful if
its mouth was a thin hard line rather than, as it usually is, a gaping mass of
slavering fangs.
may i remind you sir, hissed number two at the captain, that you have
now been in that bath for over three years?! this final shot delivered, num-
ber two spun on his heel and stalked off to a corner to practise darting eye
movements in the mirror.
the captain squirmed in his bath. he gave ford prefect a lame smile.

129

well you need to relax a lot in a job like mine, he said.
ford slowly lowered his hands. it provoked no reaction. arthur lowered his.
treading very slowly and carefully, ford moved over to the bath pedestal. he
patted it.
nice, he lied.
he wondered if it was safe to grin. very slowly and carefully, he grinned. it
was safe.
er ... he said to the captain.
yes? said the captain.
i wonder, said ford, could i ask you actually what your job is in fact?
a hand tapped him on the shoulder. he span round.
it was the first officer.
your drinks, he said.
ah, thank you, said ford. he and arthur took their jynnan tonnyx. arthur
sipped his, and was surprised to discover it tasted very like a whisky and soda.
i mean, i couldnt help noticing, said ford, also taking a sip, the bodies.
in the hold.
bodies? said the captain in surprise.
ford paused and thought to himself. never take anything for granted, he
thought. could it be that the captain doesnt know hes got fifteen million
dead bodies on his ship?
the captain was nodding cheerfully at him. he also appeared to be playing
with a rubber duck.
ford looked around. number two was staring at him in the mirror, but only
for an instant: his eyes were constantly on the move. the first officer was just
standing there holding the drinks tray and smiling benignly.
bodies? said the captain again.
ford licked his lips.
yes, he said, all those dead telephone sanitizers and account executives,
you know, down in the hold.
the captain stared at him. suddenly he threw back his head and laughed.
oh theyre not dead, he said, good lord no, no theyre frozen. theyre
going to be revived.
ford did something he very rarely did. he blinked.
arthur seemed to come out of a trance.
you mean youve got a hold full of frozen hairdressers? he said.
oh yes, said the captain, millions of them. hairdressers, tired tv produc-
ers, insurance salesmen, personnel officers, security guards, public relations
executives, management consultants, you name them. were going to colonize
another planet.

130

chapter 23.

ford wobbled very slightly.
exciting isnt it? said the captain.
what, with that lot? said arthur.
ah, now dont misunderstand me, said the captain, were just one of the
ships in the ark fleet. were the b ark you see. sorry, could i just ask you
to run a bit more hot water for me?
arthur obliged, and a cascade of pink frothy water swirled around the bath.
the captain let out a sigh of pleasure.
thank you so much my dear fellow. do help yourselves to more drinks of
course.
ford tossed down his drink, took the bottle from the first officers tray and
refilled his glass to the top.
what, he said, is a b ark?
this is, said the captain, and swished the foamy water around joyfully with
the duck.
yes, said ford, but ...
well what happened you see was, said the captain, our planet, the world
from which we have come, was, so to speak, doomed.
doomed?
oh yes. so what everyone thought was, lets pack the whole population into
some giant spaceships and go and settle on another planet.
having told this much of his story, he settled back with a satisfied grunt.
you mean a less doomed one? promoted arthur.
what did you say dear fellow?
a less doomed planet. you were going to settle on.
are going to settle on, yes. so it was decided to build three ships, you see,
three arks in space, and ... im not boring you am i?
no, no, said ford firmly, its fascinating.
you know its delightful, reflected the captain, to have someone else to
talk to for a change.
number twos eyes darted feverishly about the room again and then settled
back on the mirror, like a pair of flies briefly distracted from their favourite
prey of months old meat.
trouble with a long journey like this, continued the captain, is that you
end up just talking to yourself a lot, which gets terribly boring because half
the time you know what youre going to say next.
only half the time? asked arthur in surprise.
the captain thought for a moment.
yes, about half id say. anyway - wheres the soap? he fished around and
found it.

131

yes, so anyway, he resumed, the idea was that into the first ship, the a
ship, would go all the brilliant leaders, the scientists, the great artists, you
know, all the achievers; and into the third, or c ship, would go all the people
who did the actual work, who made things and did things, and then into the
b ship - thats us - would go everyone else, the middlemen you see.
he smiled happily at them.
and we were sent off first, he concluded, and hummed a little bathing tune.
the little bathing tune, which had been composed for him by one of his worlds
most exciting and prolific jingle writer (who was currently asleep in hold thirty-
six some nine hundred yards behind them) covered what would otherwise have
been an awkward moment of silence. ford and arthur shuffled their feet and
furiously avoided each others eyes.
er ... said arthur after a moment, what exactly was it that was wrong
with your planet then?
oh, it was doomed, as i said, said the captain, apparently it was going to
crash into the sun or something. or maybe it was that the moon was going to
crash into us. something of the kind. absolutely terrifying prospect whatever
it was.
oh, said the first officer suddenly, i thought it was that the planet was
going to be invaded by a gigantic swarm of twelve foot piranha bees. wasnt
that it?
number two span around, eyes ablaze with a cold hard light that only comes
with the amount of practise he was prepared to put in.
thats not what i was told! he hissed, my commanding officer told me
that the entire planet was in imminent danger of being eaten by an enormous
mutant star goat!
oh really ... said ford prefect.
yes! a monstrous creature from the pit of hell with scything teeth ten thou-
sand miles long, breath that would boil oceans, claws that could tear continents
from their roots, a thousand eyes that burned like the sun, slavering jaws a
million miles across, a monster such as you have never ... never ... ever ...
and they made sure they sent you lot off first did they? inquired arthur.
oh yes, said the captain, well everyone said, very nicely i thought, that it
was very important for morale to feel that they would be arriving on a planet
where they could be sure of a good haircut and where the phones were clean.
oh yes, agreed ford, i can see that would be very important. and the
other ships, er ... they followed on after you did they?
for a moment the captain did not answer. he twisted round in his bath and
gazed backwards over the huge bulk of the ship towards the bright galactic
centre. he squinted into the inconceivable distance.

132

chapter 23.

ah. well its funny you should say that, he said and allowed himself a slight
frown at ford prefect, because curiously enough we havent heard a peep out
of them since we left five years ago ... but they must be behind us somewhere.
he peered off into the distance again.
ford peered with him and gave a thoughtful frown.
unless of course, he said softly, they were eaten by the goat ...
ah yes ... said the captain with a slight hesitancy creeping into his voice,
the goat ... his eyes passed over the solid shapes of the instruments and
computers that lined the bridge. they winked away innocently at him. he
stared out at the stars, but none of them said a word. he glanced at his first
and second officers, but they seemed lost in their own thoughts for a moment.
he glanced at ford prefect who raised his eyebrows at him.
its a funny thing you know, said the captain at last, but now that i actu-
ally come to tell the story to someone else ... i mean does it strike you as odd
number two?
errrrrrrrrrrr ... said number two.
well, said ford, i can see that youve got a lot of things youre going to
talk about, so, thanks for the drinks, and if you could sort of drop us off at
the nearest convenient planet ...
ah, well thats a little difficult you see, said the captain, because our tra-
jectory thingy was preset before we left golgafrincham, i think partly because
im not very good with figures ...
you mean were stuck here on this ship? exclaimed ford suddenly losing
patience with the whole charade, when are you meant to be reaching this
planet youre meant to be colonizing?
oh, were nearly there i think, said the captain, any second now.
its
probably time i was getting out of this bath in fact. oh, i dont know though,
why stop just when im enjoying it?
so were actually going to land in a minute?
well not so much land, in fact, not actually land as such, no ... er ...
what are you talking about? said ford sharply.
well, said the captain, picking his way through the words carefully, i think
as far as i can remember we were programmed to crash on it.
crash? shouted ford and arthur.
er, yes, said the captain, yes, its all part of the plan i think. there was
a terribly good reason for it which i cant quite remember at the moment. it
was something to with ... er ...
ford exploded.
youre a load of useless bloody loonies! he shouted.
ah yes, that was it, beamed the captain, that was the reason.

133

134

chapter 23.



the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy has this to say about the planet of
golgafrincham: it is a planet with an ancient and mysterious history, rich in
legend, red, and occasionally green with the blood of those who sought in times
gone by to conquer her; a land of parched and barren landscapes, of sweet and
sultry air heady with the scent of the perfumed springs that trickle over its
hot and dusty rocks and nourish the dark and musty lichens beneath; a land
of fevered brows and intoxicated imaginings, particularly amongst those who
taste the lichens; a land also of cool and shaded thoughts amongst those who
have learnt to forswear the lichens and find a tree to sit beneath; a land also
of steel and blood and heroism; a land of the body and of the spirit. this was
its history.
and in all this ancient and mysterious history, the most mysterious figures
of all were without doubt those of the great circling poets of arium. these
circling poets used to live in remote mountain passes where they would lie in
wait for small bands of unwary travellers, circle round them, and throw rocks
at them.
and when the travellers cried out, saying why didnt they go away and get
on with writing some poems instead of pestering people with all this rock-
throwing business, they would suddenly stop, and then break into one of the
seven hundred and ninety-four great song cycles of vassilian. these songs
were all of extraordinary beauty, and even more extraordinary length, and all
fell into exactly the same pattern.
the first part of each song would tell how there once went forth from the city
of vassilian a party of five sage princes with four horses. the princes, who are
of course brave, noble and wise, travel widely in distant lands, fought giant
ogres, pursue exotic philosophies, take tea with weird gods and rescue beauti-
ful monsters from ravening princesses before finally announcing that they have
achieved enlightenment and that their wanderings are therefore accomplished.136

chapter 24.

the second, and much longer, part of each song would then tell of all their
bickerings about which one of them is going to have to walk back.
all this lay in the planets remote past. it was, however, a descendant of one
of these eccentric poets who invented the spurious tales of impending doom
which enabled the people of golgafrincham to rid themselves of an entire use-
less third of their population. the other two-thirds stayed firmly at home and
lived full, rich and happy lives until they were all suddenly wiped out by a
virulent disease contracted from a dirty telephone.



that night the ship crash-landed on to an utterly insignificant little green-blue
planet which circled a small unregarded yellow sun in the uncharted backwa-
ters of the unfashionable end of the western spiral arm of the galaxy.
in the hours preceding the crash ford prefect had fought furiously but in vain
to unlock the controls of the ship from their pre-ordained flight path. it had
quickly become apparent to him that the ship had been programmed to con-
vey its payload safely, in uncomfortably, to its new home but to cripple itself
beyond repair in the process.
its screaming, blazing descent through the atmosphere had stripped away most
of its superstructure and outer shielding, and its final inglorious bellyflop into
a murky swamp had left its crew only a few hours of darkness during which to
revive and offload its deep-frozen and unwanted cargo for the ship began to
settle almost at once, slowly upending its gigantic bulk in the stagnant slime.
once or twice during the night it was starkly silhouetted against the sky as
burning meteors - the detritus of its descent - flashed across the sky.
in the grey pre-dawn light it let out an obscene roaring gurgle and sank for
ever into the stinking depths.
when the sun came up that morning it shed its thin watery light over a vast
area heaving with wailing hairdressers, public relations executives, opinion
pollsters and the rest, all clawing their way desperately to dry land.
a less strong minded sun would probably have gone straight back down again,
but it continued to climb its way through the sky and after a while the influence
of its warming rays began to have some restoring effect on the feebly struggling
creatures.
countless numbers had, unsurprisingly, been lost to the swamp in the night,
and millions more had been sucked down with the ship, but those that survived
still numbered hundreds of thousands and as the day wore on they crawled out
over the surrounding countryside, each looking for a few square feet of solid138

chapter 25.

ground on which to collapse and recover from their nightmare ordeal.
two figures moved further afield.
from a nearby hillside ford prefect and arthur dent watched the horror of
which they could not feel a part.
filthy dirty trick to pull, muttered arthur.
ford scraped a stick along the ground and shrugged.
an imaginative solution to a problem id have thought, he said.
why cant people just learn to live together in peace and harmony? said
arthur.
ford gave a loud, very hollow laugh.
forty-two! he said with a malicious grin, no, doesnt work. never mind.
arthur looked at him as if hed gone mad and, seeing nothing to indicate the
contrary, realized that it would be perfectly reasonable to assume that this
had in fact happened.
what do you think will happen to them all? he said after a while.
in an infinite universe anything can happen, said ford, even survival.
strange but true.
a curious look came into his eyes as they passed over the landscape and then
settles again on the scene of misery below them.
i think theyll manage for a while, he said.
arthur looked up sharply.
why do you say that? he said.
ford shrugged.
just a hunch, he said, and refused to be drawn to any further questions.
look, he said suddenly.
arthur followed his pointing finger. down amongst the sprawling masses a
figure was moving - or perhaps lurching would be a more accurate description.
he appeared to be carrying something on his shoulder. as he lurched from
prostrate form to prostrate form he seemed to wave whatever the something
was at them in a drunken fashion. after a while he gave up the struggle and
collapsed in a heap.
arthur had no idea what this was meant to mean to him.
movie camera, said ford. recording the historic movement.
well, i dont know about you, said ford again after a moment, but im
off.
he sat a while in silence.
after a while this seemed to require comment.
er, when you say youre off, what do you mean exactly? said arthur.
good question, said ford, im getting total silence.
looking over his shoulder arthur saw that he was twiddling with knobs on a

139

small box. ford had already introduced this box as a sub-etha sens-o-matic,
but arthur had merely nodded absently and not pursued the matter. in his
mind the universe still divided into two parts - the earth, and everything else.
the earth having been demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass
meant that this view of things was a little lopsided, but arthur tended to
cling to that lopsidedness as being his last remaining contact with his home.
sub-etha sens-o-matics belonged firmly in the everything else category.
not a sausage, said ford, shaking the thing.
sausage, thought arthur to himself as he gazed listlessly at the primitive world
about him, what i wouldnt give for a good earth sausage.
would you believe, said ford in exasperation, that there are no transmis-
sions of any kind within light years of this benighted tip? are you listening to
me?
what? said arthur.
were in trouble, said ford.
oh, said arthur. this sounded like month-old news to him.
until we pick up anything on this machine, said ford, our chances of get-
ting off this planet are zero. it may be some freak standing wave effect in the
planets magnetic field - in which case we just travel round and round till we
find a clear reception area. coming?
he picked up his gear and strode off.
arthur looked down the hill. the man with the movie camera had struggled
back up to his feet just in time to film one of his colleagues collapsing.
arthur picked a blade of grass and strode off after ford.

140

chapter 25.



i trust you had a pleasant meal? said zarniwoop to zaphod and trillian as
they rematerialized on the bridge of the starship heart of gold and lay panting
on the floor.
zaphod opened some eyes and glowered at him.
you, he spat. he staggered to his feet and stomped off to find a chair to
slump into. he found one and slumped into it.
i have programmed the computer with the improbability coordinates per-
tinent to our journey, said zarniwoop, we will arrive there very shortly.
meanwhile, why dont you relax and prepare yourself for the meeting?
zaphod said nothing. he got up again and marched over to a small cabinet
from which he pulled a bottle of old janx spirit. he took a long pull at it.
and when this is all done, said zaphod savagely, its done, alright? im
free to go and do what the hell i like and lie on beaches and stuff?
it depends what transpires from the meeting, said zarniwoop.
zaphod, who is this man? said trillian shakily, wobbling to her feet, whats
he doing here? whys he on our ship?
hes a very stupid man, said zaphod, who wants to meet the man who
rules the universe.
ah, said trillian taking the bottle from zaphod and helping herself, a social
climber.142

chapter 26.



the major problem - one of the major problems, for there are several - one of
the many major problems with governing people is that of whom you get to
do it; or rather of who manages to get people to let them do it to them.
to summarize: it is a well known fact, that those people who most want to rule
people are, ipso facto, those least suited to do it. to summarize the summary:
anyone who is capable of getting themselves made president should on no ac-
count be allowed to do the job. to summarize the summary of the summary:
people are a problem.
and so this is the situation we find: a succession of galactic presidents who so
much enjoy the fun and palaver of being in power that they very rarely notice
that theyre not.
and somewhere in the shadows behind them - who?
who can possibly rule if no one who wants to do it can be allowed to?144

chapter 27.



on a small obscure world somewhere in the middle of nowhere in particular
- nowhere, that is, that could ever be found, since it is protected by a vast
field of unprobability to which only six men in this galaxy have a key - it was
raining.
it was bucketing down, and had been for hours. it beat the top of the sea into
a mist, it pounded the trees, it churned and slopped a stretch of scrubby land
near the sea into a mudbath.
the rain pelted and danced on the corrugated iron roof of the small shack
that stood in the middle of this patch of scrubby land. it obliterated the small
rough pathway that led from the shack down to the seashore and smashed
apart the neat piles of interesting shells which had been placed there.
the noise of the rain on the roof of the shack was deafening within, but went
largely unnoticed by its occupant, whose attention was otherwise engaged.
he was a tall shambling man with rough straw-coloured hair that was damp
from the leaking roof. his clothes were shabby, his back was hunched, and his
eyes, though open, seemed closed.
in his shack was an old beaten-up armchair, an old scratched table, an old
mattress, some cushions and a stove that was small but warm.
there was also an old and slightly weatherbeaten cat, and this was currently
the focus of the mans attention. he bent his shambling form over it.
pussy, pussy, pussy, he said, coochicoochicoochicoo ... pussy want his fish?
nice piece of fish ... pussy want it?
the cat seemed undecided on the matter. it pawed rather condescendingly at
the piece of fish the man was holding out, and then got distracted by a piece
of dust on the floor.
pussy not eat his fish, pussy get thin and waste away, i think, said the man.
doubt crept into his voice.
i imagine this is what will happen, he said, but how can i tell?146

chapter 28.

he proffered the fish again.
pussy think, he said, eat fish or not eat fish. i think it is better if i dont
get involved. he sighed.
i think fish is nice, but then i think that rain is wet, so who am i to judge?
he left the fish on the floor for the cat, and retired to his seat.
ah, i seem to see you eating it, he said at last, as the cat exhausted the
entertainment possibilities of the speck of dust and pounced on to the fish.
i like it when i see you eat the fish, said the man, because in my mind you
will waste away if you dont.
he picked up from the table a piece of paper and the stub of a pencil. he
held one in one hand and the other in the other, and experimented with the
different ways of bringing them together. he tried holding the pencil under
the paper, then over the paper, then next to the paper. he tried wrapping the
paper round the pencil, he tried rubbing the stubby end of the pencil against
the paper and then he tried rubbing the sharp end of the pencil against the
paper. it made a mark, and he was delighted with the discovery, as he was
every day. he picked up another piece of paper from the table. this had a
crossword on it. he studied it briefly and filled in a couple of clues before
losing interest.
he tried sitting on one of his hands and was intrigued by the feel of the bones
of his hip.
fish come from far away, he said, or so im told. or so i imagine im told.
when the men come, or when in my mind the men come in their six black
ships, do they come in your mind too? what do you see pussy?
he looked at the cat, which was more concerned with getting the fish down as
rapidly as possible than it was with these speculations.
and when i hear their questions, do you hear questions? what do their
voices mean to you? perhaps you just think theyre singing songs to you. he
reflected on this, and saw the flaw in the supposition.
perhaps they are singing songs to you, he said, and i just think theyre
asking me questions.
he paused again. sometimes he would pause for days, just to see what it was
like.
do you think they came today? he said, i do. theres mud on the floor,
cigarettes and whisky on the table, fish on a plate for you and a memory of
them in my mind. hardly conclusive evidence i know, but then all evidence is
circumstantial. and look what else theyve left me.
he reached over to the table and pulled some things off it.
crosswords, dictionaries, and a calculator.
he played with the calculator for an hour, whilst the cat went to sleep and the

147

rain outside continued to pour. eventually he put the calculator aside.
i think i must be right in thinking they ask me questions, he said, to come
all that way and leave all these things for the privilege of singing songs to you
would be very strange behaviour. or so it seems to me. who can tell, who
can tell.
from the table he picked up a cigarette and lit it with a spill from the stove.
he inhaled deeply and sat back.
i think i saw another ship in the sky today, he said at last. a big white
one. ive never seen a big white one, just the six black ones. and the six green
ones. and the others who say they come from so far away. never a big white
one. perhaps six small black ones can look like one big white one at certain
times. perhaps i would like a glass of whisky. yes, that seems more likely.
he stood up and found a glass that was lying on the floor by the mattress. he
poured in a measure from his whisky bottle. he sat again.
perhaps some other people are coming to see me, he said.
a hundred yards away, pelted by the torrential rain, lay the heart of gold.
its hatchway opened, and three figures emerged, huddling into themselves to
keep the rain off their faces.
in there? shouted trillian above the noise of the rain.
yes, said zarniwoop.
that shack?
yes.
weird, said zaphod.
but its in the middle of nowhere, said trillian, we must have come to the
wrong place. you cant rule the universe from a shack.
they hurried through the pouring rain, and arrived, wet through, at the door.
they knocked. they shivered.
the door opened.
hello? said the man.
ah, excuse me, said zarniwoop, i have reason to believe ...
do you rule the universe? said zaphod.
the man smiled at him.
i try not to, he said, are you wet?
zaphod looked at him in astonishment.
wet? he cried, doesnt it look as if were wet?
thats how it looks to me, said the man, but how you feel about it might
be an altogether different matter. if you feel warmth makes you dry, youd
better come in.
they went in.
they looked around the tiny shack, zarniwoop with slight distaste, trillian

148

chapter 28.

with interest, zaphod with delight.
hey, er ... said zaphod, whats your name?
the man looked at them doubtfully.
i dont know. why, do you think i should have one? it seems very odd to
give a bundle of vague sensory perceptions a name.
he invited trillian to sit in the chair. he sat on the edge of the chair, zarni-
woop leaned stiffly against the table and zaphod lay on the mattress.
wowee! said zaphod, the seat of power! he tickled the cat.
listen, said zarniwoop, i must ask you some questions.
alright, said the man kindly, you can sing to my cat if you like.
would he like that? asked zaphod.
youd better ask him, said the man.
does he talk? said zaphod.
i have no memory of him talking, said the man, but i am very unreliable.
zarniwoop pulled some notes out of a pocket.
now, he said, you do rule the universe, do you?
how can i tell? said the man.
zarniwoop ticked off a note on the paper.
how long have you been doing this?
ah, said the man, this is a question about the past is it?
zarniwoop looked at him in puzzlement. this wasnt exactly what he had
been expecting.
yes, he said.
how can i tell, said the man, that the past isnt a fiction designed to ac-
count for the discrepancy between my immediate physical sensations and my
state of mind?
zarniwoop stared at him. the steam began to rise from his sodden clothes.
so you answer all questions like this? he said.
the man answered quickly.
i say what it occurs to me to say when i think i hear people say things. more
i cannot say.
zaphod laughed happily.
ill drink to that, he said and pulled out the bottle of janx spirit. he leaped
up and handed the bottle to the ruler of the universe, who took it with plea-
sure.
good on you, great ruler, he said, tell it like it is.
no, listen to me, said zarniwoop, people come to you do they? in ships
...
i think so, said the man. he handed the bottle to trillian.
and they ask you, said zarniwoop, to take decisions for them? about

149

peoples lives, about worlds, about economies, about wars, about everything
going on out there in the universe?
out there? said the man, out where?
out there! said zarniwoop pointing at the door.
how can you tell theres anything out there, said the man politely, the
doors closed.
the rain continued to pound the roof. inside the shack it was warm.
but you know theres a whole universe out there! cried zarniwoop. you
cant dodge your responsibilities by saying they dont exist!
the ruler of the universe thought for a long while whilst zarniwoop quivered
with anger.
youre very sure of your facts, he said at last, i couldnt trust the thinking
of a man who takes the universe - if there is one - for granted.
zarniwoop still quivered, but was silent.
i only decide about my universe, continued the man quietly. my universe
is my eyes and my ears. anything else is hearsay.
but dont you believe in anything?
the man shrugged and picked up his cat.
i dont understand what you mean, he said.
you dont understand that what you decide in this shack of yours affects the
lives and fates of millions of people? this is all monstrously wrong!
i dont know. ive never met all these people you speak of. and neither, i
suspect, have you. they only exist in words we hear. it is folly to say you
know what is happening to other people. only they know, if they exist. they
have their own universes of their own eyes and ears.
trillian said:
i think im just popping outside for a moment.
she left and walked into the rain.
do you believe other people exist? insisted zarniwoop.
i have no opinion. how can i say?
id better see whats up with trillian, said zaphod and slipped out.
outside, he said to her:
i think the universe is in pretty good hands, yeah?
very good, said trillian. they walked off into the rain.
inside, zarniwoop continued.
but dont you understand that people live or die on your word?
the ruler of the universe waited for as long as he could. when he heard the
faint sound of the ships engines starting he spoke to cover it.
its nothing to do with me, he said, i am not involved with people. the
lord knows i am not a cruel man.

150

chapter 28.

ah! barked zarniwoop, you say the lord. you believe in something!
my cat, said the man benignly, picking it up and stroking it, i call him the
lord. i am kind to him.
alright, said zarniwoop, pressing home his point, how do you know he
exists? how do you know he knows you to be kind, or enjoys what he thinks
of as your kindness?
i dont, said the man with a smile, i have no idea. it merely pleases me
to behave in a certain way to what appears to be a cat. do you behave any
differently? please, i think i am tired.
zarniwoop heaved a thoroughly dissatisfied sigh and looked about.
where are the other two? he said suddenly.
what other two? said the ruler of the universe, settling back into his chair
and refilling his whisky glass.
beeblebrox and the girl! the two who were here!
i remember no one. the past is a fiction to account for ...
stuff it, snapped zarniwoop and ran out into the rain. there was no ship.
the rain continued to churn the mud. there was no sign to show where the
ship had been. he hollered into the rain. he turned and ran back to the shack
and found it locked.
the ruler of the universe dozed lightly in his chair. after a while he played
with the pencil and the paper again and was delighted when he discovered how
to make a mark with the one on the other. various noises continued outside,
but he didnt know whether they were real or not. he then talked to his table
for a week to see how it would react.



the stars came out that night, dazzling in their brilliance and clarity. ford
and arthur had walked more miles than they had any means of judging and
finally stopped to rest. the night was cool and balmy, the air pure, the sub-
etha sens.o.matic totally silent.
a wonderful stillness hung over the world, a magical calm which combined
with the soft fragrances of the woods, the quiet chatter of insects and the bril-
liant light of the stars to soothe their jangled spirits. even ford prefect, who
had seen more worlds than he could count on a long afternoon, was moved
to wonder if this was the most beautiful he had ever seen. all that day they
had passed through rolling green hills and valleys, richly covered with grasses,
wild scented flowers and tall thickly leaved trees, the sun had warmed them,
light breezes had kept them cool, and ford prefect had checked his sub-etha
sens-o-matic at less and less frequent intervals, and had exhibited less and
less annoyance at its continued silence. he was beginning to think he liked it
here.
cool though the night air was they slept soundly and comfortably in the open
and awoke a few hours later with the light dewfall feeling refreshed but hun-
gry. ford had stuffed some small rolls into his satchel at milliways and they
breakfasted off those before moving on.
so far they had wandered purely at random, but now they struck out firmly
eastwards, feeling that if they were going to explore this world they should
have some clear idea of where they had come from and where they were going.
shortly before noon they had their first indication that the world they had
landed on was not an uninhabited one: a half glimpsed face amongst the trees,
watching them. it vanished at the moment they both saw it, but the image
they were both left with was of a humanoid creature, curious to see them but
not alarmed. half an hour later they glimpsed another such face, and ten
minutes after that another.152

chapter 29.

a minute later they stumbled into a wide clearing and stopped short.
before them in the middle of the clearing stood a group of about two dozen
men and women. they stood still and quiet facing ford and arthur. around
some of the women huddled some small children and behind the group was a
ramshackle array of small dwellings made of mud and branches.
ford and arthur held their breath.
the tallest of the men stood a little over five feet high, they all stooped for-
ward slightly, had longish arms and lowish foreheads, and clear bright eyes
with which they stared intently at the strangers.
seeing that they carried no weapons and made no move towards them, ford
and arthur relaxed slightly.
for a while the two groups simply stared at each other, neither side making any
move. the natives seemed puzzled by the intruders, and whilst they showed
no sign of aggression they were quite clearly not issuing any invitations.
for a full two minutes nothing continued to happen.
after two minutes ford decided it was time something happened.
hello, he said.
the women drew their children slightly closer to them.
the men made hardly any discernible move and yet their whole disposition
made it clear that the greeting was not welcome - it was not resented in any
great degree, it was just not welcome.
one of the men, who had been standing slightly forward of the rest of the
group and who might therefore have been their leader, stepped forward. his
face was quiet and calm, almost serene.
ugghhhuuggghhhrrrr uh uh ruh uurgh, he said quietly.
this caught arthur by surprise. he had grown so used to receiving an in-
stantaneous and unconscious translation of everything he heard via the babel
fish lodged in his ear that he had ceased to be aware of it, and he was only
reminded of its presence now by the fact that it didnt seem to be working.
vague shadows of meaning had flickered at the back of his mind, but there was
nothing he could get any firm grasp on. he guessed, correctly as it happens,
that these people had as yet evolved no more than the barest rudiments of
language, and that the babel fish was therefore powerless to help. he glanced
at ford, who was infinitely more experienced in these matters.
i think, said ford out of the corner of his mouth, hes asking us if wed
mind walking on round the edge of the village.
a moment later, a gesture from the man-creature seemed to confirm this.
ruurgggghhhh urrgggh; urgh urgh (uh ruh) rruurruuh ug, continued the
man-creature.
the general gist, said ford, as far as i can make out, is that we are welcome

153

to continue our journey in any way we like, but if we would walk round his
village rather than through it it would make them all very happy.
so what do we do?
i think we make them happy, said ford.
slowly and watchfully they walked round the perimeter of the clearing. this
seemed to go down very well with the natives who bowed to them very slightly
and then went about their business.
ford and arthur continued their journey through the wood. a few hundred
yards past the clearing they suddenly came upon a small pile of fruit lying in
their path - berries that looked remarkably like raspberries and blackberries,
and pulpy, green skinned fruit that looked remarkably like pears.
so far they had steered clear of the fruit and berries they had seen, though
the trees and bushed were laden with them.
look at it this way, ford prefect had said, fruit and berries on strange
planets either make you live or make you die. therefore the point at which to
start toying with them is when youre going to die if you dont. that way you
stay ahead. the secret of healthy hitch-hiking is to eat junk food.
they looked at the pile that lay in their path with suspicion. it looked so good
it made them almost dizzy with hunger.
look at it this way, said ford, er ...
yes? said arthur.
im trying to think of a way of looking at it which means we get to eat it,
said ford.
the leaf-dappled sun gleamed on the pulp skins of the things which looked like
pears. the things which looked like raspberries and strawberries were fatter
and riper than any arthur had ever seen, even in ice cream commercials.
why dont we eat them and think about it afterwards? he said.
maybe thats what they want us to do.
alright, look at it this way ...
sounds good so far.
its there for us to eat. either its good or its bad, either they want to feed
us or to poison us. if its poisonous and we dont eat it theyll just attack us
some other way. if we dont eat, we lose out either way.
i like the way youre thinking, said ford, now eat one.
hesitantly, arthur picked up one of those things that looked like pears.
i always thought that about the garden of eden story, said ford.
eh?
garden of eden. tree. apple. that bit, remember?
yes of course i do.
your god person puts an apple tree in the middle of a garden and says do

154

chapter 29.

what you like guys, oh, but dont eat the apple. surprise surprise, they eat
it and he leaps out from behind a bush shouting gotcha. it wouldnt have
made any difference if they hadnt eaten it.
why not?
because if youre dealing with somebody who has the sort of mentality which
likes leaving hats on the pavement with bricks under them you know perfectly
well they wont give up. theyll get you in the end.
what are you talking about?
never mind, eat the fruit.
you know, this place almost looks like the garden of eden.
eat the fruit.
sounds quite like it too.
arthur took a bite from the thing which looked like a pear.
its a pear, he said.
a few moments later, when they had eaten the lot, ford prefect turned round
and called out.
thank you. thank you very much, he called, youre very kind.
they went on their way.
for the next fifty miles of their journey eastward they kept on finding the
occasional gift of fruit lying in their path, and though they once or twice had
a quick glimpse of a native man- creature amongst the trees, they never again
made direct contact. they decided they rather liked a race of people who
made it clear that they were grateful simply to be left alone.
the fruit and berries stopped after fifty miles, because that was where the sea
started.
having no pressing calls on their time they built a raft and crossed the sea. it
was reasonably calm, only about sixty miles wide and they had a reasonably
pleasant crossing, landing in a country that was at least as beautiful as the
one they had left.
life was, in short, ridiculously easy and for a while at least they were able to
cope with the problems of aimlessness and isolation by deciding to ignore them.
when the craving for company became too great they would know where to
find it, but for the moment they were happy to feel that the golgafrinchans
were hundreds of miles behind them.
nevertheless, ford prefect began to use his sub-etha sens-o-matic more of-
ten again. only once did he pick up a signal, but that was so faint and from
such enormous distance that it depressed him more than the silence that had
otherwise continued unbroken.
on a whim they turned northwards. after weeks of travelling they came to
another sea, built another raft and crossed it. this time it was harder going,

155

the climate was getting colder. arthur suspected a streak of masochism in
ford prefect - the increasing difficulty of the journey seemed to give him a
sense of purpose that was otherwise lacking. he strode onwards relentlessly.
their journey northwards brought them into steep mountainous terrain of
breathtaking sweep and beauty. the vast, jagged, snow covered peaks rav-
ished their senses. the cold began to bite into their bones.
they wrapped themselves in animal skins and furs which ford prefect acquired
by a technique he once learned from a couple of ex-pralite monks running a
mind-surfing resort in the hills of hunian.
the galaxy is littered with ex-pralite monks, all on the make, because the
mental control techniques the order have evolved as a form of devotional dis-
cipline are, frankly, sensational - and extraordinary numbers of monks leave
the order just after they have finished their devotional training and just before
they take their final vows to stay locked in small metal boxes for the rest of
their lives.
fords technique seemed to consist mainly of standing still for a while and
smiling.
after a while an animal - a deer perhaps - would appear from out of the trees
and watch him cautiously. ford would continue to smile at it, his eyes would
soften and shine, and he would seem to radiate a deep and universal love, a
love which reached out to embrace all of creation. a wonderful quietness would
descend on the surrounding countryside, peaceful and serene, emanating from
this transfigured man. slowly the deer would approach, step by step, until it
was almost nuzzling him, whereupon ford prefect would reach out to it and
break its neck.
pheromone control, he said it was, you just have to know how to generate
the right smell.

156

chapter 29.



a few days after landing in this mountainous land they hit a coastline which
swept diagonally before them from the south-west to the north-east, a coast-
line of monumental grandeur: deep majestic ravines, soaring pinnacles of ice -
fjords.
for two further days they scrambled and climbed over the rocks and glaciers,
awe-struck with beauty.
arthur! yelled ford suddenly.
it was the afternoon of the second day. arthur was sitting on a high rock
watching the thundering sea smashing itself against the craggy promontories.
arthur! yelled ford again.
arthur looked to where fords voice had come from, carried faintly in the wind.
ford had gone to examine a glacier, and arthur found him there crouching by
the solid wall of blue ice. he was tense with excitement - his eyes darted up
to meet arthurs.
look, he said, look!
arthur looked. he saw the solid wall of blue ice.
yes, he said, its a glacier. ive already seen it.
no, said ford, youve looked at it, you havent seen it. look!
ford was pointing deep into the heart of the ice.
arthur peered - he saw nothing but vague shadows.
move back from it, insisted ford, look again.
arthur moved back and looked again.
no, he said, and shrugged. what am i supposed to be looking for?
and suddenly he saw it.
you see it?
he saw it.
his mouth started to speak, but his brain decided it hadnt got anything to
say yet and shut it again. his brain then started to contend with the problem158

chapter 30.

of what his eyes told it they were looking at, but in doing so relinquished
control of the mouth which promptly fell open again. once more gathering up
the jaw, his brain lost control of his left hand which then wandered around in
an aimless fashion. for a second or so the brain tried to catch the left hand
without letting go of the mouth and simultaneously tried to think about what
was buried in the ice, which is probably why the legs went and arthur dropped
restfully to the ground.
the thing that had been causing all this neural upset was a network of shad-
ows in the ice, about eighteen inches beneath the surface. looked at it from
the right angle they resolved into the solid shapes of letters from an alien al-
phabet, each about three feet high; and for those, like arthur, who couldnt
read magrathean there was above the letters the outline of a face hanging in
the ice.
it was an old face, thin and distinguished, careworn but not unkind.
it was the face of the man who had won an award for designing the coastline
they now knew themselves to be standing on.



a thin whine filled the air. it whirled and howled through the trees upsetting
the squirrels. a few birds flew off in disgust. the noise danced and skittered
round the clearing. it whooped, it rasped, it generally offended.
the captain, however, regarded the lone bagpiper with an indulgent eye. lit-
tle could disturb his equanimity; indeed, once he had got over the loss of his
gorgeous bath during that unpleasantness in the swamp all those months ago
he had begun to find his new life remarkably congenial. a hollow had been
scooped out of a large rock which stood in the middle of the clearing, and in
this he would bask daily whilst attendants sloshed water over him. not par-
ticularly warm water, it must be said, as they hadnt yet worked out a way of
heating it. never mind, that would come, and in the meantime search parties
were scouring the countryside far and wide for a hot spring, preferably one in a
nice leafy glade, and if it was near a soap mine - perfection. to those who said
that they had a feeling soap wasnt found in mines, the captain had ventured
to suggest that perhaps that was because no one had looked hard enough, and
this possibility had been reluctantly acknowledged.
no, life was very pleasant, and the greatest thing about it was that when the
hot spring was found, complete with leafy glade en suite, and when in the
fullness of time the cry came reverberating across the hills that the soap mine
had been located and was producing five hundred cakes a day it would be
more pleasant still. it was very important to have things to look forward to.
wail, wail, screech, wail, howl, honk, squeak went the bagpipes, increasing the
captains already considerable pleasure at the thought that any moment now
they might stop. that was something he looked forward to as well.
what else was pleasant, he asked himself? well, so many things: the red and
gold of the trees, now that autumn was approaching; the peaceful chatter of
scissors a few feet from his bath where a couple of hairdressers were exercising
their skills on a dozing art director and his assistant; the sunlight gleaming off160

chapter 31.

the six shiny telephones lined up along the edge of his rock-hewn bath. the
only thing nicer than a phone that didnt ring all the time (or indeed at all)
was six phones that didnt ring all the time (or indeed at all).
nicest of all was the happy murmur of all the hundreds of people slowly assem-
bling in the clearing around him to watch the afternoon committee meeting.
the captain punched his rubber duck playfully on the beak. the afternoon
committee meetings were his favourite.
other eyes watched the assembling crowds. high in a tree on the edge of
the clearing squatted ford prefect, lately returned from foreign climes. after
his six month journey he was lean and healthy, his eyes gleamed, he wore a
reindeer-skin coat; his beard was as thick and his face as bronzed as a country-
rock singers.
he and arthur dent had been watching the golgafrinchans for almost a week
now, and ford had decided to stir things up a bit.
the clearing was now full. hundreds of men and women lounged around, chat-
ting, eating fruit, playing cards and generally having a fairly relaxed time of
it. their track suits were now all dirty and even torn, but they all had immac-
ulately styled hair. ford was puzzled to see that many of them had stuffed
their track suits full of leaves and wondered if this was meant to be some form
of insulation against the coming winter. fords eyes narrowed. they couldnt
be interested in botany of a sudden could they?
in the middle of these speculations the captains voice rose above the hubbub.
alright, he said, id like to call this meeting to some sort of order if thats
at all possible. is that alright with everybody? he smiled genially. in a
minute. when youre all ready.
the talking gradually died away and the clearing fell silent, except for the
bagpiper who seemed to be in some wild and uninhabitable musical world of
his own. a few of those in his immediate vicinity threw some leaves to him.
if there was any reason for this then it escaped ford prefect for the moment.
a small group of people had clustered round the captain and one of them was
clearly beginning to speak. he did this by standing up, clearing his throat and
then gazing off into the distance as if to signify to the crowd that he would be
with them in a minute.
the crowd of course were riveted and all turned their eyes on him.
a moment of silence followed, which ford judged to be the right dramatic
moment to make his entry. the man turned to speak.
ford dropped down out of the tree.
hi there, he said.
the crowd swivelled round.
ah my dear fellow, called out the captain, got any matches on you? or a

161

lighter? anything like that?
no, said ford, sounding a little deflated. it wasnt what hed prepared. he
decided hed better be a little stronger on the subject.
no i havent, he continued, no matches. instead i bring you news ...
pity, said the captain, weve all run out you see. havent had a hot bath
in weeks.
ford refused to be headed off.
i bring you news, he said, of a discovery that might interest you.
is it on the agenda? snapped the man whom ford had interrupted.
ford smiled a broad country-rock singer smile.
now, come on, he said.
well im sorry, said the man huffily, but speaking as a management con-
sultant of many years standing, i must insist on the importance of observing
the committee structure.
ford looked round the crowd.
hes mad you know, he said, this is a prehistoric planet.
address the chair! snapped the management consultant.
there isnt chair, explained ford, theres only a rock.
the management consultant decided that testiness was what the situation now
called for.
well, call it a chair, he said testily.
why not call it a rock? asked ford.
you obviously have no conception, said the management consultant, not
abandoning testiness in favour of good old fashioned hauteur, of modern
business methods.
and you have no conception of where you are, said ford.
a girl with a strident voice leapt to her feet and used it.
shut up, you two, she said, i want to table a motion.
you mean boulder a motion, tittered a hairdresser.
order, order! yapped the management consultant.
alright, said ford, lets see how you are doing. he plonked himself down
on the ground to see how long he could keep his temper.
the captain made a sort of conciliatory harrumphing noise.
i would like to call to order, he said pleasantly, the five hundred and
seventy-third meeting of the colonization committee of fintlewoodlewix ...
ten seconds, thought ford as he leapt to his feet again.
this is futile, he exclaimed, five hundred and seventy-three committee
meetings and you havent even discovered fire yet!
if you would care, said the girl with the strident voice, to examine the
agenda sheet ...

162

chapter 31.

agenda rock, trilled the hairdresser happily.
thank you, ive made that point, muttered ford.
... you ... will ... see ... continued the girl firmly, that we are having a
report from the hairdressers fire development sub-committee today.
oh ... ah - said the hairdresser with a sheepish look which is recognized the
whole galaxy over as meaning er, will next tuesday do?
alright, said ford, rounding on him, what have you done? what are you
going to do? what are your thoughts on fire development?
well i dont know, said the hairdresser, all they gave me was a couple of
sticks ...
so what have you done with them?
nervously, the hairdresser fished in his track suit top and handed over the
fruits of his labour to ford.
ford held them up for all to see.
curling tongs, he said.
the crowd applauded.
never mind, said ford, rome wasnt burnt in a day.
the crowd hadnt the faintest idea what he was talking about, but they loved
it nevertheless. they applauded.
well, youre obviously being totally naive of course, said the girl, when
youve been in marketing as long as i have youll know that before any new
product can be developed it has to be properly researched. weve got to find
out what people want from fire, how they relate to it, what sort of image it
has for them.
the crowd were tense. they were expecting something wonderful from ford.
stick it up your nose, he said.
which is precisely the sort of thing we need to know, insisted the girl, do
people want fire that can be applied nasally?
do you? ford asked the crowd.
yes! shouted some.
no! shouted others happily.
they didnt know, they just thought it was great.
and the wheel, said the captain, what about this wheel thingy? it sounds
a terribly interesting project.
ah, said the marketing girl, well, were having a little difficulty there.
difficulty? exclaimed ford, difficulty? what do you mean, difficulty?
its the single simplest machine in the entire universe!
the marketing girl soured him with a look.
alright, mr wiseguy, she said, youre so clever, you tell us what colour it
should have.

163

the crowd went wild. one up to the home team, they thought. ford shrugged
his shoulders and sat down again.
almighty zarquon, he said, have none of you done anything?
as if in answer to his question there was a sudden clamour of noise from the
entrance to the clearing. the crowd couldnt believe the amount of entertain-
ment they were getting this afternoon: in marched a squad of about a dozen
men dressed in the remnants of their golgafrincham 3rd regiment dress uni-
forms. about half of them still carried kill-o-zap guns, the rest now carried
spears which they struck together as they marched. they looked bronzed,
healthy, and utterly exhausted and bedraggled. they clattered to a halt and
banged to attention. one of them fell over and never moved again.
captain, sir! cried number two - for he was their leader - permission to
report sir!
yes, alright number two, welcome back and all that. find any hot springs?
said the captain despondently.
no sir!
thought you wouldnt.
number two strode through the crowd and presented arms before the bath.
we have discovered another continent!
when was this?
it lies across the sea ... said number two, narrowing his eyes significantly,
to the east!
ah.
number two turned to face the crowd. he raised his gun above his head. this
is going to be great, thought the crowd.
we have declared war on it!
wild abandoned cheering broke out in all corners of the clearing - this was
beyond all expectation.
wait a minute, shouted ford prefect, wait a minute!
he leapt to his feet and demanded silence. after a while he got it, or at least
the best silence he could hope for under the circumstances: the circumstances
were that the bagpiper was spontaneously composing a national anthem.
do we have to have the piper? demanded ford.
oh yes, said the captain, weve given him a grant.
ford considered opening this idea up for debate but quickly decided that that
way madness lay. instead he slung a well judged rock at the piper and turned
to face number two.
war? he said.
yes! number two gazed contemptuously at ford prefect.
on the next continent?

164

chapter 31.

yes! total warfare! the war to end all wars!
but theres no one even living there yet!
ah, interesting, thought the crowd, nice point.
number twos gaze hovered undisturbed. in this respect his eyes were like a
couple of mosquitos that hover purposefully three inches from your nose and
refuse to be deflected by arm thrashes, fly swats or rolled newspapers.
i know that, he said, but there will be one day! so we have left an open-
ended ultimatum.
what?
and blown up a few military installations.
the captain leaned forward out of his bath.
military installations number two? he said.
for a moment the eyes wavered.
yes sir, well potential military installations. alright ... trees.
the moment of uncertainty passed - his eyes flickered like whips over his au-
dience.
and, he roared, we interrogated a gazelle!
he flipped his kill-o-zap gun smartly under his arm and marched off through
the pandemonium that had now erupted throughout the ecstatic crowd. a few
steps was all he managed before he was caught up and carried shoulder high
for a lap of honour round the clearing.
ford sat and idly tapped a couple of stones together.
so what else have you done? he inquired after the celebrations had died
down.
we have started a culture, said the marketing girl.
oh yes? said ford.
yes. one of our film producers is already making a fascinating documentary
about the indigenous cavemen of the area.
theyre not cavemen.
they look like cavemen.
do they live in caves?
well ...
they live in huts.
perhaps theyre having their caves redecorated, called out a wag from the
crowd.
ford rounded on him angrily.
very funny, he said, but have you noticed that theyre dying out?
on their journey back, ford and arthur had come across two derelict villages
and the bodies of many natives in the woods, where they had crept away to
die. those that still lived were stricken and listless, as if they were suffering

165

some disease of the spirit rather than the body. they moved sluggishly and
with an infinite sadness. their future had been taken away from them.
dying out! repeated ford. do you know what that means?
er ... we shouldnt sell them any life insurance? called out the wag again.
ford ignored him, and appealed to the whole crowd.
can you try and understand, he said, that its just since weve arrived that
theyve started dying out!
in fact that comes over terribly well in this film, said the marketing girl,
and just gives it that poignant twist which is the hallmark of the really great
documentary. the producers very committed.
he should be, muttered ford.
i gather, said the girl, turning to address the captain who was beginning to
nod off, that he wants to make one about you next, captain.
oh really? he said, coming to with a start, thats awfully nice.
hes got a very strong angle on it, you know, the burden of responsibility, the
loneliness of command ...
the captain hummed and hahed about this for a moment.
well, i wouldnt overstress that angle, you know, he said finally, ones never
alone with a rubber duck.
he held the duck aloft and it got an appreciative round from the crowd.
all the while, the management consultant had been sitting in stony silence,
his finger tips pressed to his temples to indicate that he was waiting and would
wait all day if it was necessary.
at this point he decided he would not wait all day after all, he would merely
pretend that the last half hour hadnt happened.
he rose to his feet.
if, he said tersely, we could for a moment move on to the subject of fiscal
policy ...
fiscal policy! whooped ford prefect, fiscal policy!
the management consultant gave him a look that only a lungfish could have
copied.
fiscal policy ... he repeated, that is what i said.
how can you have money, demanded ford, if none of you actually produces
anything? it doesnt grow on trees you know.
if you would allow me to continue ...
ford nodded dejectedly.
thank you. since we decided a few weeks ago to adopt the leaf as legal ten-
der, we have, of course, all become immensely rich.
ford stared in disbelief at the crowd who were murmuring appreciatively at
this and greedily fingering the wads of leaves with which their track suits were

166

chapter 31.

stuffed.
but we have also, continued the management consultant, run into a small
inflation problem on account of the high level of leaf availability, which means
that, i gather, the current going rate has something like three deciduous forests
buying one ships peanut.
murmurs of alarm came from the crowd. the management consultant waved
them down.
so in order to obviate this problem, he continued, and effectively revaluate
the leaf, we are about to embark on a massive defoliation campaign, and ... er,
burn down all the forests. i think youll all agree thats a sensible move under
the circumstances.
the crowd seemed a little uncertain about this for a second or two until some-
one pointed out how much this would increase the value of the leaves in their
pockets whereupon they let out whoops of delight and gave the management
consultant a standing ovation. the accountants amongst them looked forward
to a profitable autumn.
youre all mad, explained ford prefect.
youre absolutely barmy, he suggested.
youre a bunch of raving nutters, he opined.
the tide of opinion started to turn against him. what had started out as
excellent entertainment had now, in the crowds view, deteriorated into mere
abuse, and since this abuse was in the main directed at them they wearied of
it.
sensing this shift in the wind, the marketing girl turned on him.
is it perhaps in order, she demanded, to inquire what youve been doing
all these months then? you and that other interloper have been missing since
the day we arrived.
weve been on a journey, said ford, we went to try and find out something
about this planet.
oh, said the girl archly, doesnt sound very productive to me.
no? well have i got news for you, my love. we have discovered this planets
future.
ford waited for this statement to have its effect. it didnt have any. they
didnt know what he was talking about.
he continued.
it doesnt matter a pair of fetid dingos kidneys what you all choose to do from
now on. burn down the forests, anything, it wont make a scrap of difference.
your future history has already happened. two million years youve got and
thats it. at the end of that time your race will be dead, gone and good rid-
dance to you. remember that, two million years!

167

the crowd muttered to itself in annoyance. people as rich as they had sud-
denly become shouldnt be obliged to listen to this sort of gibberish. perhaps
they could tip the fellow a leaf or two and he would go away.
they didnt need to bother. ford was already stalking out of the clearing,
pausing only to shake his head at number two who was already firing his
kill-o-zap gun into some neighbouring trees.
he turned back once.
two million years! he said and laughed.
well, said the captain with a soothing smile, still time for a few more
baths. could someone pass me the sponge? i just dropped it over the side.

168

chapter 31.



a mile or so away through the wood, arthur dent was too busily engrossed
with what he was doing to hear ford prefect approach.
what he was doing was rather curious, and this is what it was: on a wide flat
piece of rock he had scratched out the shape of a large square, subdivided into
one hundred and sixty-nine smaller squares, thirteen to a side.
furthermore he had collected together a pile of smallish flattish stones and
scratched the shape of a letter on to each. sitting morosely round the rock
were a couple of the surviving local native men whom arthur dent was trying
to introduce the curious concept embodied in these stones.
so far they had not done well. they had attempted to eat some of them, bury
others and throw the rest of them away. arthur had finally encouraged one
of them to lay a couple of stones on the board he had scratched out, which
was not even as far as hed managed to get the day before. along with the
rapid deterioration in the morale of these creatures, there seemed to be a cor-
responding deterioration in their actual intelligence.
in an attempt to egg them along, arthur set out a number of letters on the
board himself, and then tried to encourage the natives to add some more them-
selves.
it was not going well.
ford watched quietly from beside a nearby tree.
no, said arthur to one of the natives who had just shuffled some of the
letters round in a fit of abysmal dejection, q scores ten you see, and its
on a triple word score, so ...
look, ive explained the rules to you ... no no,
look please, put down that jawbone ... alright, well start again. and try to
concentrate this time.
ford leaned his elbow against the tree and his hand against his head.
what are you doing, arthur? he asked quietly.
arthur looked up with a start. he suddenly had a feeling that all this might170

chapter 32.

look slightly foolish. all he knew was that it had worked like a dream on him
when he was a chid. but things were different then, or rather would be.
im trying to teach the cavemen to play scrabble, he said.
theyre not cavemen, said ford.
they look like cavemen.
ford let it pass.
i see, he said.
its uphill work, said arthur wearily, the only word they know is grunt and
they cant spell it.
he sighed and sat back.
whats that supposed to achieve? asked ford.
weve got to encourage them to evolve! to develop! arthur burst out an-
grily. he hoped that the weary sigh and then the anger might do something
to counteract the overriding feeling of foolishness from which he was currently
suffering. it didnt. he jumped to his feet.
can you imagine what a world would be like descended from those ... cretins
we arrived with? he said.
imagine? said ford, rising his eyebrows. we dont have to imagine. weve
seen it.
but ... arthur waved his arms about hopelessly.
weve seen it, said ford, theres no escape.
arthur kicked at a stone.
did you tell them what weve discovered? he asked.
hmmmm? said ford, not really concentrating.
norway, said arthur, slartibartfasts signature in the glacier. did you tell
them?
whats the point? said ford, what would it mean to them?
mean? said arthur, mean? you know perfectly well what it means. it
means that this planet is the earth! its my home! its where i was born!
was? said ford.
alright, will be.
yes, in two million years time. why dont you tell them that? go and say
to them, excuse me, id just like to point out that in two million years time
i will be born just a few miles from here. see what they say. theyll chase
you up a tree and set fire to it.
arthur absorbed this unhappily.
face it, said ford, those zeebs over there are your ancestors, not these poor
creatures here.
he went over to where the apemen creatures were rummaging listlessly with
the stone letters. he shook his head.

171

put the scrabble away, arthur, he said, it wont save the human race, be-
cause this lot arent going to be the human race. the human race is currently
sitting round a rock on the other side of this hill making documentaries about
themselves.
arthur winced.
there must be something we can do, he said. a terrible sense of desolation
thrilled through his body that he should be here, on the earth, the earth
which had lost its future in a horrifying arbitrary catastrophe and which now
seemed set to lose its past as well.
no, said ford, theres nothing we can do. this doesnt change the history
of the earth, you see, this is the history of the earth. like it or leave it, the
golgafrinchans are the people you are descended from.
in two million years
they get destroyed by the vogons. history is never altered you see, it just fits
together like a jigsaw. funny old thing, life, isnt it?
he picked up the letter q and hurled it into a distant pivet bush where it hit
a young rabbit. the rabbit hurtled off in terror and didnt stop till it was set
upon and eaten by a fox which choked on one of its bones and died on the
bank of a stream which subsequently washed it away.
during the following weeks ford prefect swallowed his pride and struck up a
relationship with a girl who had been a personnel officer on golgafrincham,
and he was terribly upset when she suddenly passed away as a result of drink-
ing water from a pool that had been polluted by the body of a dead fox. the
only moral it is possible to draw from this story is that one should never throw
the letter q into a pivet bush, but unfortunately there are times when it is
unavoidable.
like most of the really crucial things in life, this chain of events was completely
invisible to ford prefect and arthur dent. they were looking sadly at one of
the natives morosely pushing the other letters around.
poor bloody caveman, said arthur.
theyre not ...
what?
oh never mind.
the wretched creature let out a pathetic howling noise and banged on the
rock.
its all been a bit of waste of time for them, hasnt it? said arthur.
uh uh urghhhhh, muttered the native and banged on the rock again.
theyve been outevolved by telephone sanitizers.
urgh, gr gr, gruh! insisted the native, continuing to bang on the rock.
why does he keep banging on the rock? said arthur.
i think he probably wants you to scrabble with him again, said ford, hes

172

chapter 32.

i keep on telling him

pointing at the letters.
probably spelt crzjgrdwldiwdc again, poor bastard.
theres only one g in crzjgrdwldiwdc.
the native banged on the rock again.
they looked over his shoulder.
their eyes popped.
there amongst the jumble of letters were eight that had been laid out in a
clear straight line.
they spelt two words.
the words were these:
forty-two.
grrrurgh guh guh, explained the native. he swept the letters angrily away
and went and mooched under a nearby tree with his colleague.
ford and arthur stared at him. then they stared at each other.
did that say what i thought it said? they both said to each other.
yes, they both said.
forty-two, said arthur.
forty-two, said ford.
arthur ran over to the two natives.
what are you trying to tell us? he shouted. whats it supposed to mean?
one of them rolled over on the ground, kicked his legs up in the air, rolled over
again and went to sleep.
the other bounded up the tree and threw horse chestnuts at ford prefect.
whatever it was they had to say, they had already said it.
you know what this means, said ford.
not entirely.
forty-two is the number deep thought gave as being the ultimate answer.
yes.
and the earth is the computer deep thought designed and built to calculate
the question to the ultimate answer.
so we are led to believe.
and organic life was part of the computer matrix.
if you say so.
i do say so. that means that these natives, these apemen are an integral part
of the computer program, and that we and the golgafrinchans are not.
but the cavemen are dying out and the golgafrinchans are obviously set to
replace them.
exactly. so do you see what this means?
what?
cock up, said ford prefect.

173

arthur looked around him.
this planet is having a pretty bloody time of it, he said.
ford puzzled for a moment.
still, something must have come out of it, he said at last, because marvin
said he could see the question printed in your brain wave patterns.
but ...
probably the wrong one, or a distortion of the right one. it might give us a
clue though if we could find it. i dont see how we can though.
they moped about for a bit. arthur sat on the ground and started pulling
up bits of grass, but found that it wasnt an occupation he could get deeply
engrossed in. it wasnt grass he could believe in, the trees seemed pointless,
the rolling hills seemed to be rolling to nowhere and the future seemed just a
tunnel to be crawled through.
ford fiddled with his sub-etha sens-o-matic. it was silent. he sighed and
put it away.
arthur picked up one of the letter stones from his home-made scrabble set. it
was a t. he sighed and out it down again. the letter he put down next to it
was an i. that spelt it. he tossed another couple of letters next to them they
were an s and an h as it happened. by a curious coincidence the resulting
word perfectly expressed the way arthur was feeling about things just then.
he stared at it for a moment. he hadnt done it deliberately, it was just a
random chance. his brain got slowly into first gear.
ford, he said suddenly, look, if that question is printed in my brain wave
patterns but im not consciously aware of it it must be somewhere in my un-
conscious.
yes, i suppose so.
there might be a way of bringing that unconscious pattern forward.
oh yes?
yes, by introducing some random element that can be shaped by that pat-
tern.
like how?
like by pulling scrabble letters out of a bag blindfolded.
ford leapt to his feet.
brilliant! he said. he tugged his towel out of his satchel and with a few deft
knots transformed it into a bag.
totally mad, he said, utter nonsense. but well do it because its brilliant
nonsense. come on, come on.
the sun passed respectfully behind a cloud. a few small sad raindrops fell.
they piled together all the remaining letters and dropped them into the bag.
they shook them up.

174

chapter 32.

right, said ford, close your eyes. pull them out. come on come on, come
on.
arthur closed his eyes and plunged his hand into the towelful of stones. he
jiggled them about, pulled out four and handed them to ford. ford laid them
along the ground in the order he got them.
w, said ford, h, a, t ... what!
he blinked.
i think its working! he said.
arthur pushed three more at him.
d, o, y ... doy. oh perhaps it isnt working, said ford.
heres the next three.
o, u, g ... doyoug ... its not making sense im afraid.
arthur pulled another two from the bag. ford put them in place.
e, t, doyouget ... do you get! shouted ford, it is working! this is amaz-
ing, it really is working!
more here. arthur was throwing them out feverishly as fast as he could go.
i, f, said ford, y, o, u, ... m, u, l, t, i, p, l, y, ... what do you get
if you multiply, ... s, i, x, ... six, b, y, by, six by ... what do you get if you
multiply six by ... n, i, n, e, ... six by nine ... he paused. come on, wheres
the next one?
er, thats the lot, said arthur, thats all there were.
he sat back, nonplussed.
he rooted around again in the knotted up towel but there were no more letters.
you mean thats it? said ford.
thats it.
six by nine. forty-two.
thats it. thats all there is.



the sun came out and beamed cheerfully at them. a bird sang. a warm
breeze wafted through the trees and lifted the heads of the flowers, carrying
their scent away through the woods. an insect droned past on its way to do
whatever it is that insects do in the late afternoon. the sound of voices lilted
through the trees followed a moment later by two girls who stopped in surprise
at the sight of ford prefect and arthur dent apparently lying on the ground
in agony, but in fact rocking with noiseless laughter.
no, dont go, called ford prefect between gasps, well be with you in a
moment.
whats the matter? asked one of the girls. she was the taller and slimmer
of the two. on golgafrincham she had been a junior personnel officer, but
hadnt liked it much.
ford pulled himself together.
excuse me, he said, hello. my friend and i were just contemplating the
meaning of life. frivolous exercise.
oh its you, said the girl, you made a bit of a spectacle of yourself this
afternoon. you were quite funny to begin with but you did bang on a bit.
did i? oh yes.
yes, what was all that for? asked the other girl, a shorter round-faced girl
who had been an art director for a small advertising company on golgafrin-
cham. whatever the privations of this world were, she went to sleep every
night profoundly grateful for the fact that whatever she had to face in the
morning it wouldnt be a hundred almost identical photographs of moodily lit
tubes of toothpaste.
for? for nothing. nothings for anything, said ford prefect happily. come
and join us. im ford, this is arthur. we were just about to do nothing at all
for a while but it can wait.
the girls looked at them doubtfully.176

chapter 33.

im agda, said the tall one, this is mella.
hello agda, hello mella, said ford.
do you talk at all? said mella to arthur.
oh, eventually, said arthur with a smile, but not as much as ford.
good.
there was a slight pause.
what did you mean, asked agda, about only having two million years? i
couldnt make sense of what you were saying.
oh that, said ford, it doesnt matter.
its just that the world gets demolished to make way for a hyperspace bypass,
said arthur with a shrug, but thats two million years away, and anyway its
just vogons doing what vogons do.
vogons? said mella.
yes, you wouldnt know them.
whered you get this idea from?
it really doesnt matter. its just like a dream from the past, or the future.
arthur smiled and looked away.
does it worry you that you dont talk any kind of sense? asked agda.
listen, forget it, said ford, forget all of it. nothing matters. look, its a
beautiful day, enjoy it. the sun, the green of the hills, the river down in the
valley, the burning trees.
even if its only a dream, its a pretty horrible idea, said mella, destroying
a world just to make a bypass.
oh, ive heard of worse, said ford, i read of one planet off in the seventh
dimension that got used as a ball in a game of intergalactic bar billiards. got
potted straight into a black hole. killed ten billion people.
thats mad, said mella.
yes, only scored thirty points too.
agda and mella exchanged glances.
look, said agda, theres a party after the committee meeting tonight. you
can come along if you like.
yeah, ok, said ford.
id like to, said arthur.
many hours later arthur and mella sat and watched the moon rise over the
dull red glow of the trees.
that story about the world being destroyed ... began mella.
in two million years, yes.
you say it as if you really think its true.
yes, i think it is. i think i was there.
she shook her head in puzzlement.

177

youre very strange, she said.
no, im very ordinary, said arthur, but some very strange things have hap-
pened to me. you could say im more differed from than differing.
and that other world your friend talked about, the one that got pushed into
a black hole.
ah, that i dont know about. it sounds like something from the book.
what book?
arthur paused.
the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy, he said at last.
whats that?
oh, just something i threw into the river this evening. i dont think ill be
wanting it any more, said arthur dent.

life, the universe, and everything

douglas adams

2

introduction

the regular early morning yell of horror was the sound of arthur dent waking
up and suddenly remembering where he was.
it wasnt just that the cave was cold, it wasnt just that it was damp and
smelly. it was the fact that the cave was in the middle of islington and there
wasnt a bus due for two million years.
time is the worst place, so to speak, to get lost in, as arthur dent could
testify, having been lost in both time and space a good deal. at least being
lost in space kept you busy.
he was stranded in prehistoric earth as the result of a complex sequence of
events which had involved him being alternately blown up and insulted in more
bizarre regions of the galaxy than he ever dreamt existed, and though his life
had now turned very, very, very quiet, he was still feeling jumpy.
he hadnt been blown up now for five years.
since he had hardly seen anyone since he and ford prefect had parted com-
pany four years previously, he hadnt been insulted in all that time either.
except just once.
it had happened on a spring evening about two years previously.
he was returning to his cave just a little after dusk when he became aware
of lights flashing eerily through the clouds. he turned and stared, with hope
suddenly clambering through his heart. rescue. escape. the castaways im-
possible dream - a ship.
and as he watched, as he stared in wonder and excitement, a long silver ship
descended through the warm evening air, quietly, without fuss, its long legs
unlocking in a smooth ballet of technology.
it alighted gently on the ground, and what little hum it had generated died
away, as if lulled by the evening calm.
a ramp extended itself.
light streamed out.
a tall figure appeared silhouetted in the hatchway. it walked down the ramp4

and stood in front of arthur.
youre a jerk, dent, it said simply.
it was alien, very alien.
it had a peculiar alien tallness, a peculiar alien
flattened head, peculiar slitty little alien eyes, extravagantly draped golden
ropes with a peculiarly alien collar design, and pale grey-green alien skin which
had about it that lustrous shine which most grey-green faces can only acquire
with plenty of exercise and very expensive soap.
arthur boggled at it.
it gazed levelly at him.
arthurs first sensations of hope and trepidation had instantly been over-
whelmed by astonishment, and all sorts of thoughts were battling for the use
of his vocal chords at this moment.
whh ...? he said.
bu ... hu ... uh ... he added.
ru ... ra ... wah ... who? he managed finally to say and lapsed into a
frantic kind of silence. he was feeling the effects of having not said anything
to anybody for as long as he could remember.
the alien creature frowned briefly and consulted what appeared to be some
species of clipboard which he was holding in his thin and spindly alien hand.
arthur dent? it said.
arthur nodded helplessly.
arthur philip dent? pursued the alien in a kind of efficient yap.
er ... er ... yes ... er ... er, confirmed arthur.
youre a jerk, repeated the alien, a complete asshole.
er ...
the creature nodded to itself, made a peculiar alien tick on its clipboard and
turned briskly back towards the ship.
er ... said arthur desperately, er ...
dont give me that! snapped the alien. it marched up the ramp, through
the hatchway and disappeared into the ship. the ship sealed itself. it started
to make a low throbbing hum.
er, hey! shouted arthur, and started to run helplessly towards it.
wait a minute! he called. what is this? what? wait a minute!
the ship rose, as if shedding its weight like a cloak to the ground, and hovered
briefly. it swept strangely up into the evening sky. it passed up through the
clouds, illuminating them briefly, and then was gone, leaving arthur alone in
an immensity of land dancing a helplessly tiny little dance.
what? he screamed. what? what? hey, what? come back here and say
that!
he jumped and danced until his legs trembled, and shouted till his lungs

5

rasped. there was no answer from anyone. there was no one to hear him or
speak to him.
the alien ship was already thundering towards the upper reaches of the at-
mosphere, on its way out into the appalling void which separates the very few
things there are in the universe from each other.
its occupant, the alien with the expensive complexion, leaned back in its single
seat. his name was wowbagger the infinitely prolonged. he was a man with
a purpose. not a very good purpose, as he would have been the first to admit,
but it was at least a purpose and it did at least keep him on the move.
wowbagger the infinitely prolonged was indeed, is - one of the universes
very small number of immortal beings.
those who are born immortal instinctively know how to cope with it, but
wowbagger was not one of them. indeed he had come to hate them, the load
of serene bastards. he had had his immortality thrust upon him by an un-
fortunate accident with an irrational particle accelerator, a liquid lunch and
a pair of rubber bands. the precise details of the accident are not important
because no one has ever managed to duplicate the exact circumstances under
which it happened, and many people have ended up looking very silly, or dead,
or both, trying.
wowbagger closed his eyes in a grim and weary expression, put some light jazz
on the ships stereo, and reflected that he could have made it if it hadnt been
for sunday afternoons, he really could have done.
to begin with it was fun, he had a ball, living dangerously, taking risks, clean-
ing up on high-yield long-term investments, and just generally outliving the
hell out of everybody.
in the end, it was the sunday afternoons he couldnt cope with, and that terri-
ble listlessness which starts to set in at about 2.55, when you know that youve
had all the baths you can usefully have that day, that however hard you stare
at any given paragraph in the papers you will never actually read it, or use
the revolutionary new pruning technique it describes, and that as you stare
at the clock the hands will move relentlessly on to four oclock, and you will
enter the long dark teatime of the soul.
so things began to pall for him. the merry smiles he used to wear at other
peoples funerals began to fade. he began to despise the universe in general,
and everyone in it in particular.
this was the point at which he conceived his purpose, the thing which would
drive him on, and which, as far as he could see, would drive him on forever. it
was this.
he would insult the universe.
that is, he would insult everybody in it. individually, personally, one by one,

6

and (this was the thing he really decided to grit his teeth over) in alphabetical
order.
when people protested to him, as they sometimes had done, that the plan was
not merely misguided but actually impossible because of the number of people
being born and dying all the time, he would merely fix them with a steely look
and say, a man can dream cant he?
and so he started out. he equipped a spaceship that was built to last with the
computer capable of handling all the data processing involved in keeping track
of the entire population of the known universe and working out the horrifically
complicated routes involved.
his ship fled through the inner orbits of the sol star system, preparing to
slingshot round the sun and fling itself out into interstellar space.
computer, he said.
here, yipped the computer.
where next?
computing that.
wowbagger gazed for a moment at the fantastic jewellery of the night, the
billions of tiny diamond worlds that dusted the infinite darkness with light.
every one, every single one, was on his itinerary. most of them he would be
going to millions of times over.
he imagined for a moment his itinerary connecting up all the dots in the sky
like a childs numbered dots puzzle. he hoped that from some vantage point
in the universe it might be seen to spell a very, very rude word.
the computer beeped tunelessly to indicate that it had finished its calcula-
tions.
folfanga, it said. it beeped.
fourth world of the folfanga system, it continued. it beeped again.
estimated journey time, three weeks, it continued further. it beeped again.
there to meet with a small slug, it beeped, of the genus a- rth-urp-hil-
ipdenu.
i believe, it added, after a slight pause during which it beeped, that you
had decided to call it a brainless prat.
wowbagger grunted. he watched the majesty of creation outside his window
for a moment or two.
i think ill take a nap, he said, and then added, what network areas are we
going to be passing through in the next few hours?
the computer beeped.
cosmovid, thinkpix and home brain box, it said, and beeped.
any movies i havent seen thirty thousand times already?
no.

7

uh.
theres angst in space. youve only seen that thirty-three thousand five
hundred and seventeen times.
wake me for the second reel.
the computer beeped.
sleep well, it said.
the ship fled on through the night.
meanwhile, on earth, it began to pour with rain and arthur dent sat in his
cave and had one of the most truly rotten evenings of his entire life, thinking
of things he could have said to the alien and swatting flies, who also had a
rotten evening.
the next day he made himself a pouch out of rabbit skin because he thought
it would be useful to keep things in.

8



this morning, two years later than that, was sweet and fragrant as he emerged
from the cave he called home until he could think of a better name for it or
find a better cave.
though his throat was sore again from his early morning yell of horror, he was
suddenly in a terrifically good mood. he wrapped his dilapidated dressing
gown tightly around him and beamed at the bright morning.
the air was clear and scented, the breeze flitted lightly through the tall grass
around his cave, the birds were chirruping at each other, the butterflies were
flitting about prettily, and the whole of nature seemed to be conspiring to be
as pleasant as it possibly could.
it wasnt all the pastoral delights that were making arthur feel so cheery,
though. he had just had a wonderful idea about how to cope with the terrible
lonely isolation, the nightmares, the failure of all his attempts at horticulture,
and the sheer futurelessness and futility of his life here on prehistoric earth,
which was that he would go mad.
he beamed again and took a bite out of a rabbit leg left over from his supper.
he chewed happily for a few moments and then decided formally to announce
his decision.
he stood up straight and looked the world squarely in the fields and hills. to
add weight to his words he stuck the rabbit bone in his hair. he spread his
arms out wide.
i will go mad! he announced.
good idea, said ford prefect, clambering down from the rock on which he
had been sitting.
arthurs brain somersaulted. his jaw did press-ups.
i went mad for a while, said ford, did me no end of good.
you see, said ford, - ...
where have you been? interrupted arthur, now that his head had finished10

chapter 1.

working out.
around, said ford, around and about. he grinned in what he accurately
judged to be an infuriating manner. i just took my mind off the hook for a
bit. i reckoned that if the world wanted me badly enough it would call back.
it did.
he took out of his now terribly battered and dilapidated satchel his sub-etha
sens-o-matic.
at least, he said, i think it did. this has been playing up a bit. he shook
it. if it was a false alarm i shall go mad, he said, again.
arthur shook his head and sat down. he looked up.
i thought you must be dead ... he said simply.
so did i for a while, said ford, and then i decided i was a lemon for a
couple of weeks. a kept myself amused all that time jumping in and out of a
gin and tonic.
arthur cleared his throat, and then did it again.
where, he said, did you ...?
find a gin and tonic? said ford brightly. i found a small lake that thought
it was a gin and tonic, and jumped in and out of that. at least, i think it
thought it was a gin and tonic.
i may, he added with a grin which would have sent sane men scampering
into trees, have been imagining it.
he waited for a reaction from arthur, but arthur knew better than that.
carry on, he said levelly.
the point is, you see, said ford, that there is no point in driving yourself
mad trying to stop yourself going mad. you might just as well give in and save
your sanity for later.
and this is you sane again, is it? said arthur. i ask merely for informa-
tion.
i went to africa, said ford.
yes?
yes.
what was that like?
and this is your cave is it? said ford.
er, yes, said arthur. he felt very strange. after nearly four years of total
isolation he was so pleased and relieved to see ford that he could almost cry.
ford was, on the other hand, an almost immediately annoying person.
very nice, said ford, in reference to arthurs cave. you must hate it.
arthur didnt bother to reply.
africa was very interesting, said ford, i behaved very oddly there.
he gazed thoughtfully into the distance.

11

i took up being cruel to animals, he said airily. but only, he added, as a
hobby.
oh yes, said arthur, warily.
yes, ford assured him. i wont disturb you with the details because they
would -
what?
disturb you. but you may be interested to know that i am singlehandedly
responsible for the evolved shape of the animal you came to know in later
centuries as a giraffe. and i tried to learn to fly. do you believe me?
tell me, said arthur.
ill tell you later. ill just mention that the guide says ...
the ...?
guide. the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy. you remember?
yes. i remember throwing it in the river.
yes, said ford, but i fished it out.
you didnt tell me.
i didnt want you to throw it in again.
fair enough, admitted arthur. it says?
what?
the guide says?
the guide says there is an art to flying, said ford, or rather a knack.
the knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground and miss. he
smiled weakly. he pointed at the knees of his trousers and held his arms up
to show the elbows. they were all torn and worn through.
i havent done very well so far, he said. he stuck out his hand. im very
glad to see you again, arthur, he added.
arthur shook his head in a sudden access of emotion and bewilderment.
i havent seen anyone for years, he said, not anyone.
i can hardly even
remember how to speak. i keep forgetting words. i practise you see. i practise
by talking to ... talking to ... what are those things people think youre mad
if you talk to? like george the third.
kings? suggested ford.
no, no, said arthur. the things he used to talk to. were surrounded by
them for heavens sake. ive planted hundreds myself. they all died. trees! i
practise by talking to trees. whats that for?
ford still had his hand stuck out. arthur looked at it with incomprehension.
shake, prompted ford.
arthur did, nervously at first, as if it might turn out to be a fish. then he
grasped it vigorously with both hands in an overwhelming flood of relief. he
shook it and shook it.

12

chapter 1.

after a while ford found it necessary to disengage. they climbed to the top
of a nearby outcrop of rock and surveyed the scene around them.
what happened to the golgafrinchans? asked ford.
arthur shrugged.
a lot of them didnt make it through the winter three years ago, he said,
and the few who remained in the spring said they needed a holiday and set
off on a raft. history says that they must have survived ...
huh, said ford, well well. he stuck his hands on his hips and looked round
again at the empty world. suddenly, there was about ford a sense of energy
and purpose.
were going, he said excitedly, and shivered with energy.
where? how? said arthur.
i dont know, said ford, but i just feel that the time is right. things are
going to happen. were on our way.
he lowered his voice to a whisper.
i have detected, he said, disturbances in the wash.
he gazed keenly into the distance and looked as if he would quite like the wind
to blow his hair back dramatically at that point, but the wind was busy fooling
around with some leaves a little way off.
arthur asked him to repeat what he had just said because he hadnt quite
taken his meaning. ford repeated it.
the wash? said arthur.
the space-time wash, said ford, and as the wind blew briefly past at that
moment, he bared his teeth into it.
arthur nodded, and then cleared his throat.
are we talking about, he asked cautiously, some sort of vogon laundromat,
or what are we talking about?
eddies, said ford, in the space-time continuum.
ah, nodded arthur, is he? is he? he pushed his hands into the pocket of
his dressing gown and looked knowledgeably into the distance.
what? said ford.
er, who, said arthur, is eddy, then, exactly?
ford looked angrily at him.
will you listen? he snapped.
i have been listening, said arthur, but im not sure its helped.
ford grasped him by the lapels of his dressing gown and spoke to him as slowly
and distinctly and patiently as if he were somebody from a telephone company
accounts department.
there seem ... he said, to be some pools ... he said, of instability ... he
said, in the fabric ... he said ...

13

arthur looked foolishly at the cloth of his dressing gown where ford was hold-
ing it. ford swept on before arthur could turn the foolish look into a foolish
remark.
... in the fabric of space-time, he said.
ah, that, said arthur.
yes, that, confirmed ford.
they stood there alone on a hill on prehistoric earth and stared each other
resolutely in the face.
and its done what? said arthur.
it, said ford, has developed pools of instability.
has it? said arthur, his eyes not wavering for a moment.
it has, said ford with a similar degree of ocular immobility.
good, said arthur.
see? said ford.
no, said arthur.
there was a quiet pause.
the difficulty with this conversation, said arthur after a sort of pondering
look had crawled slowly across his face like a mountaineer negotiating a tricky
outcrop, is that its very different from most of the ones ive had of late.
which, as i explained, have mostly been with trees. they werent like this.
except perhaps some of the ones ive had with elms which sometimes get a
bit bogged down.
arthur, said ford.
hello? yes? said arthur.
just believe everything i tell you, and it will all be very, very simple.
ah, well im not sure i believe that.
they sat down and composed their thoughts.
ford got out his sub-etha sens-o-matic. it was making vague humming noises
and a tiny light on it was flickering faintly.
flat battery? said arthur.
no, said ford, there is a moving disturbance in the fabric of space-time, an
eddy, a pool of instability, and its somewhere in our vicinity.
where?
ford moved the device in a slow lightly bobbing semi-circle. suddenly the light
flashed.
there! said ford, shooting out his arm. there, behind that sofa!
arthur looked. much to his surprise, there was a velvet paisley- covered
chesterfield sofa in the field in front of them. he boggled intelligently at
it. shrewd questions sprang into his mind.
why, he said, is there a sofa in that field?

14

chapter 1.

i told you! shouted ford, leaping to his feet. eddies in the space-time
continuum!
and this is his sofa, is it? asked arthur, struggling to his feet and, he hoped,
though not very optimistically, to his senses.
arthur! shouted ford at him, that sofa is there because of the space-time
instability ive been trying to get your terminally softened brain to get to grips
with. its been washed out of the continuum, its space-time jetsam, it doesnt
matter what it is, weve got to catch it, its our only way out of here!
he scrambled rapidly down the rocky outcrop and made off across the field.
catch it? muttered arthur, then frowned in bemusement as he saw that the
chesterfield was lazily bobbing and wafting away across the grass.
with a whoop of utterly unexpected delight he leapt down the rock and
plunged off in hectic pursuit of ford prefect and the irrational piece of furni-
ture.
they careered wildly through the grass, leaping, laughing, shouting instruc-
tions to each other to head the thing off this way or that way. the sun shone
dreamily on the swaying grass, tiny field animals scattered crazily in their
wake.
arthur felt happy. he was terribly pleased that the day was for once working
out so much according to plan. only twenty minutes ago he had decided he
would go mad, and now he was already chasing a chesterfield sofa across the
fields of prehistoric earth.
the sofa bobbed this way and that and seemed simultaneously to be as solid
as the trees as it drifted past some of them and hazy as a billowing dream as
it floated like a ghost through others.
ford and arthur pounded chaotically after it, but it dodged and weaved as if
following its own complex mathematical topography, which it was. still they
pursued, still it danced and span, and suddenly turned and dipped as if cross-
ing the lip of a catastrophe graph, and they were practically on top of it. with
a heave and a shout they leapt on it, the sun winked out, they fell through a
sickening nothingness, and emerged unexpectedly in the middle of the pitch at
lords cricked ground, st johns wood, london, towards the end of the last
test match of the australian series in the year 198-, with england needing
only twenty-eight runs to win.



important facts from galactic history, number one:
(reproduced from the siderial daily mentioners book of popular galactic
history.)
the night sky over the planet krikkit is the least interesting sight in the entire
universe.16

chapter 2.



it was a charming and delightful day at lords as ford and arthur tumbled
haphazardly out of a space-time anomaly and hit the immaculate turf rather
hard.
the applause of the crowd was tremendous. it wasnt for them, but instinc-
tively they bowed anyway, which was fortunate because the small red heavy
ball which the crowd actually had been applauding whistled mere millimetres
over arthurs head. in the crowd a man collapsed.
they threw themselves back to the ground which seemed to spin hideously
around them.
what was that? hissed arthur.
something red, hissed ford back at him.
where are we?
er, somewhere green.
shapes, muttered arthur. i need shapes.
the applause of the crowd had been rapidly succeeded by gasps of astonish-
ment, and the awkward titters of hundreds of people who could not yet make
up their minds about whether to believe what they had just seen or not.
this your sofa? said a voice.
what was that? whispered ford.
arthur looked up.
something blue, he said.
shape? said ford.
arthur looked again.
it is shaped, he hissed at ford, with his brow savagely furrowing, like a
policeman.
they remained crouched there for a few moments, frowning deeply. the blue
thing shaped like a policeman tapped them both on the shoulders.
come on, you two, the shape said, lets be having you.18

chapter 3.

these words had an electrifying effect on arthur. he leapt to his feet like
an author hearing the phone ring and shot a series of startled glanced at the
panorama around him which had suddenly settled down into something of
quite terrifying ordinariness.
where did you get this from? he yelled at the policeman shape.
what did you say? said the startled shape.
this is lords cricket ground, isnt it? snapped arthur. where did you
find it, how did you get it here? i think, he added, clasping his hand to his
brow, that i had better calm down. he squatted down abruptly in front of
ford.
it is a policeman, he said, what do we do?
ford shrugged.
what do you want to do? he said.
i want you, said arthur, to tell me that i have been dreaming for the last
five years.
ford shrugged again, and obliged.
youve been dreaming for the last five years, he said.
arthur got to his feet.
its all right, officer, he said. ive been dreaming for the last five years.
ask him, he added, pointing at ford, he was in it.
having said this, he sauntered off towards the edge of the pitch, brushing down
his dressing gown. he then noticed his dressing gown and stopped. he stared
at it. he flung himself at the policeman.
so where did i get these clothes from? he howled.
he collapsed and lay twitching on the grass.
ford shook his head.
hes had a bad two million years, he said to the policeman, and together
they heaved arthur on to the sofa and carried him off the pitch and were only
briefly hampered by the sudden disappearance of the sofa on the way.
reaction to all this from the crowd were many and various. most of them
couldnt cope with watching it, and listened to it on the radio instead.
well, this is an interesting incident, brian, said one radio commentator to
another. i dont think there have been any mysterious materializations on
the pitch since, oh since, well i dont think there have been any - have there?
- that i recall?
edgbaston, 1932?
ah, now what happened then ...
well, peter, i think it was canter facing willcox coming up to bowl from the
pavilion end when a spectator suddenly ran straight across the pitch.
there was a pause while the first commentator considered this.

19

ye ... e ... s ... he said, yes, theres nothing actually very mysterious about
that, is there? he didnt actually materialize, did he? just ran on.
no, thats true, but he did claim to have seen something materialize on the
pitch.
ah, did he?
yes. an alligator, i think, of some description.
ah. and had anyone else noticed it?
apparently not. and no one was able to get a very detailed description from
him, so only the most perfunctory search was made.
and what happened to the man?
well, i think someone offered to take him off and give him some lunch, but he
explained that hed already had a rather good one, so the matter was dropped
and warwickshire went on to win by three wickets.
so, not very like this current instance. for those of you whove just tuned
in, you may be interested to know that, er ... two men, two rather scruffily
attired men, and indeed a sofa - a chesterfield i think?
yes, a chesterfield.
have just materialized here in the middle of lords cricket ground. but i
dont think they meant any harm, theyve been very good-natured about it,
and ...
sorry, can i interrupt you a moment peter and say that the sofa has just
vanished.
so it has. well, thats one mystery less. still, its definitely one for the record
books i think, particularly occurring at this dramatic moment in play, england
now needing only twenty-four runs to win the series. the men are leaving the
pitch in the company of a police officer, and i think everyones settling down
now and play is about to resume.
now, sir, said the policeman after they had made a passage through the
curious crowd and laid arthurs peacefully inert body on a blanket, perhaps
youd care to tell me who you are, where you come from, and what that little
scene was all about?
ford looked at the ground for a moment as if steadying himself for something,
then he straightened up and aimed a look at the policeman which hit him
with the full force of every inch of the six hundred light-years distance be-
tween earth and fords home near betelgeuse.
all right, said ford, very quietly, ill tell you.
yes, well, that wont be necessary, said the policeman hurriedly, just dont
let whatever it was happen again. the policeman turned around and wan-
dered off in search of anyone who wasnt from betelgeuse. fortunately, the
ground was full of them.

20

chapter 3.

arthurs consciousness approached his body as from a great distance, and re-
luctantly. it had had some bad times in there. slowly, nervously, it entered
and settled down in to its accustomed position.
arthur sat up.
where am i? he said.
lords cricket ground, said ford.
fine, said arthur, and his consciousness stepped out again for a quick
breather. his body flopped back on the grass.
ten minutes later, hunched over a cup of tea in the refreshment tent, the colour
started to come back to his haggard face.
howre you feeling? said ford.
im home, said arthur hoarsely. he closed his eyes and greedily inhaled the
steam from his tea as if it was - well, as far as arthur was concerned, as if it
was tea, which it was.
im home, he repeated, home. its england, its today, the nightmare is
over. he opened his eyes again and smiled serenely. im where i belong, he
said in an emotional whisper.
there are two things i fell which i should tell you, said ford, tossing a copy
of the guardian over the table at him.
im home, said arthur.
yes, said ford. one is, he said pointing at the date at the top of the
paper, that the earth will be demolished in two days time.
im home, said arthur. tea, he said, cricket, he added with pleasure,
mown grass, wooden benches, white linen jackets, beer cans ...
slowly he began to focus on the newspaper. he cocked his head on one side
with a slight frown.
ive seen that one before, he said. his eyes wandered slowly up to the date,
which ford was idly tapping at. his face froze for a second or two and then
began to do that terribly slow crashing trick which arctic ice-floes do so spec-
tacularly in the spring.
and the other thing, said ford, is that you appear to have a bone in your
beard. he tossed back his tea.
outside the refreshment tent, the sun was shining on a happy crowd. it shone
on white hats and red faces. it shone on ice lollies and melted them. it shone
on the tears of small children whose ice lollies had just melted and fallen off
the stick. it shone on the trees, it flashed off whirling cricket bats, it gleamed
off the utterly extraordinary object which was parked behind the sight-screens
and which nobody appeared to have noticed. it beamed on ford and arthur
as they emerged blinking from the refreshment tent and surveyed the scene
around them.

21

arthur was shaking.
perhaps, he said, i should ...
no, said ford sharply.
what? said arthur.
dont try and phone yourself up at home.
how did you know ...?
ford shrugged.
but why not? said arthur.
people who talk to themselves on the phone, said ford, never learn any-
thing to their advantage.
but ...
look, said ford. he picked up an imaginary phone and dialled an imaginary
dial.
hello? he said into the imaginary mouthpiece. is that arthur dent? ah,
hello, yes. this is arthur dent speaking. dont hang up.
he looked at the imaginary mouthpiece in disappointment.
he hung up, he said, shrugged, and put the imaginary phone neatly back on
its imaginary hook.
this is not my first temporal anomaly, he added.
a glummer look replaced the already glum look on arthur dents face.
so were not home and dry, he said.
we could not even be said, replied ford, to be home and vigorously tow-
elling ourselves off.
the game continued. the bowler approached the wicket at a lope, a trot,
and then a run. he suddenly exploded in a flurry of arms and legs, out of
which flew a ball. the batsman swung and thwacked it behind him over the
sight-screens. fords eyes followed the trajectory of the ball and jogged mo-
mentarily. he stiffened. he looked along the flight path of the ball again and
his eyes twitched again.
this isnt my towel, said arthur, who was rummaging in his rabbit-skin bag.
shhh, said ford. he screwed his eyes up in concentration.
i had a golgafrinchan jogging towel, continued arthur, it was blue with
yellow stars on it. this isnt it.
shhh, said ford again. he covered one eye and looked with the other.
this ones pink, said arthur, it isnt yours is it?
i would like you to shut up about your towel, said ford.
it isnt my towel, insisted arthur, that is the point i am trying to ...
and the time at which i would like you to shut up about it, continued ford
in a low growl, is now.
all right, said arthur, starting to stuff it back into the primitively stitched

22

chapter 3.

rabbit-skin bag. i realize that it is probably not important in the cosmic scale
of things, its just odd, thats all. a pink towel suddenly, instead of a blue one
with yellow stars.
ford was beginning to behave rather strangely, or rather not actually begin-
ning to behave strangely but beginning to behave in a way which was strangely
different from the other strange ways in which he more regularly behaved.
what he was doing was this. regardless of the bemused stares it was pro-
voking from his fellow members of the crowd gathered round the pitch, he
was waving his hands in sharp movements across his face, ducking down be-
hind some people, leaping up behind others, then standing still and blinking
a lot. after a moment or two of this he started to stalk forward slowly and
stealthily wearing a puzzled frown of concentration, like a leopard thats not
sure whether its just seen a half-empty tin of cat food half a mile away across
a hot and dusty plain.
this isnt my bag either, said arthur suddenly.
fords spell of concentration was broken. he turned angrily on arthur.
i wasnt talking about my towel, said arthur. weve established that that
isnt mine. its just that the bag into which i was putting the towel which is
not mine is also not mine, though it is extraordinarily similar. now personally
i think that that is extremely odd, especially as the bag was one i made myself
on prehistoric earth. these are also not my stones, he added, pulling a few
flat grey stones out of the bag. i was making a collection of interesting stones
and these are clearly very dull ones.
a roar of excitement thrilled through the crowd and obliterated whatever it
was that ford said in reply to this piece of information. the cricket ball which
had excited this reaction fell out of the sky and dropped neatly into arthurs
mysterious rabbit-skin bag.
now i would say that that was also a very curious event, said arthur, rapidly
closing the bag and pretending to look for the ball on the ground.
i dont think its here, he said to the small boys who immediately clustered
round him to join in the search, it probably rolled off somewhere. over there
i expect. he pointed vaguely in the direction in which he wished they would
push off. one of the boys looked at him quizzically.
you all right? said the boy.
no, said arthur.
then why you got a bone in your beard? said the boy.
im training it to like being wherever its put. arthur prided himself on say-
ing this. it was, he thought, exactly the sort of thing which would entertain
and stimulate young minds.
oh, said the small boy, putting his head to one side and thinking about it.

23

whats your name?
dent, said arthur, arthur dent.
youre a jerk, dent, said the boy, a complete asshole. the boy looked
past him at something else, to show that he wasnt in any particular hurry
to run away, and then wandered off scratching his nose. suddenly arthur re-
membered that the earth was going to be demolished again in two days time,
and just this once didnt feel too bad about it.
play resumed with a new ball, the sun continued to shine and ford continued
to jump up and down shaking his head and blinking.
somethings on your mind, isnt it? said arthur.
i think, said ford in a tone of voice which arthur by now recognized as one
which presaged something utterly unintelligible, that theres an sep over
there.
he pointed. curiously enough, the direction he pointed in was not the one in
which he was looking. arthur looked in the one direction, which was towards
the sight-screens, and in the other which was at the field of play. he nodded,
he shrugged. he shrugged again.
a what? he said.
an sep.
an s ...?
... ep.
and whats that?
somebody elses problem.
ah, good, said arthur and relaxed. he had no idea what all that was about,
but at least it seemed to be over. it wasnt.
over there, said ford, again pointing at the sight-screens and looking at the
pitch.
where? said arthur.
there! said ford.
i see, said arthur, who didnt.
you do? said ford.
what? said arthur.
can you see, said ford patiently, the sep?
i thought you said that was somebody elses problem.
thats right.
arthur nodded slowly, carefully and with an air of immense stupidity.
and i want to know, said ford, if you can see it.
you do?
yes.
what, said arthur, does it look like?

24

chapter 3.

well, how should i know, you fool? shouted ford. if you can see it, you
tell me.
arthur experienced that dull throbbing sensation just behind the temples
which was a hallmark of so many of his conversations with ford. his brain
lurked like a frightened puppy in its kennel. ford took him by the arm.
an sep, he said, is something that we cant see, or dont see, or our brain
doesnt let us see, because we think that its somebody elses problem. thats
what sep means. somebody elses problem. the brain just edits it out, its
like a blind spot. if you look at it directly you wont see it unless you know
precisely what it is. your only hope is to catch it by surprise out of the corner
of your eye.
ah, said arthur, then thats why ...
yes, said ford, who knew what arthur was going to say.
... youve been jumping up and ...
yes.
... down, and blinking ...
yes.
... and ...
i think youve got the message.
i can see it, said arthur, its a spaceship.
for a moment arthur was stunned by the reaction this revelation provoked.
a roar erupted from the crowd, and from every direction people were run-
ning, shouting, yelling, tumbling over each other in a tumult of confusion. he
stumbled back in astonishment and glanced fearfully around. then he glanced
around again in even greater astonishment.
exciting, isnt it? said an apparition. the apparition wobbled in front of
arthurs eyes, though the truth of the matter is probably that arthurs eyes
were wobbling in front of the apparition. his mouth wobbled as well.
w ... w ... w ... w ... his mouth said.
i think your team have just won, said the apparition.
w ... w ... w ... w ... repeated arthur, and punctuated each wobble with a
prod at ford prefects back. ford was staring at the tumult in trepidation.
you are english, arent you? said the apparition.
w ... w ... w ... w ... yes said arthur.
well, your team, as i say, have just won. the match. it means they retain
the ashes. you must be very pleased. i must say, im rather fond of cricket,
though i wouldnt like anyone outside this planet to hear me saying that. oh
dear no.
the apparition gave what looked as if it might have been a mischievous grin,
but it was hard to tell because the sun was directly behind him, creating a

25

blinding halo round his head and illuminating his silver hair and beard in a way
which was awesome, dramatic and hard to reconcile with mischievous grins.
still, he said, itll all be over in a couple of days, wont it? though as i
said to you when we last met, i was very sorry about that. still, whatever will
have been, will have been.
arthur tried to speak, but gave up the unequal struggle. he prodded ford
again.
i thought something terrible had happened, said ford, but its just the end
of the game. we ought to get out. oh, hello, slartibartfast, what are you
doing here?
oh, pottering, pottering, said the old man gravely.
that your ship? can you give us a lift anywhere?
patience, patience, the old man admonished.
ok, said ford. its just that this planets going to be demolished pretty
soon.
i know that, said slartibartfast.
and, well, i just wanted to make that point, said ford.
the point is taken.
and if you feel that you really want to hang around a cricket pitch at this
point ...
i do.
then its your ship.
it is.
i suppose. ford turned away sharply at this point.
hello, slartibartfast, said arthur at last.
hello, earthman, said slartibartfast.
after all, said ford, we can only die once.
the old man ignored this and stared keenly on to the pitch, with eyes that
seemed alive with expressions that had no apparent bearing on what was hap-
pening out there. what was happening was that the crowd was gathering itself
into a wide circle round the centre of the pitch. what slartibartfast saw in it,
he alone knew.
ford was humming something. it was just one note repeated at intervals. he
was hoping that somebody would ask him what he was humming, but nobody
did. if anybody had asked him he would have said he was humming the first
line of a noel coward song called mad about the boy over and over again.
it would then have been pointed out to him that he was only singing one note,
to which he would have replied that for reasons which he hoped would be ap-
parent, he was omitting the about the boy bit. he was annoyed that nobody
asked.

26

chapter 3.

its just, he burst out at last, that if we dont go soon, we might get caught
in the middle of it all again. and theres nothing that depresses me more
than seeing a planet being destroyed. except possibly still being on it when it
happens. or, he added in an undertone, hanging around cricket matches.
patience, said slartibartfast again. great things are afoot.
thats what you said last time we met, said arthur.
they were, said slartibartfast.
yes, thats true, admitted arthur.
all, however, that seemed to be afoot was a ceremony of some kind. it was
being specially staged for the benefit of tv rather than the spectators, and
all they could gather about it from where they were standing was what they
heard from a nearby radio. ford was aggressively uninterested.
he fretted as he heard it explained that the ashes were about to be presented
to the captain of the english team out there on the pitch, fumed when told
that this was because they had now won them for the nth time, positively
barked with annoyance at the information that the ashes were the remains of
a cricket stump, and when, further to this, he was asked to contend with the
fact that the cricket stump in question had been burnt in melbourne, australia,
in 1882, to signify the death of english cricket, he rounded on slartibartfast,
took a deep breath, but didnt have a chance to say anything because the old
man wasnt there. he was marching out on to the pitch with terrible purpose
in his gait, his hair, beard and robes swept behind him, looking very much as
moses would have looked if sinai had been a well-cut lawn instead of, as it is
more usually represented, a fiery smoking mountain.
he said to meet him at his ship, said arthur.
what in the name of zarking fardwarks is the old fool doing? exploded ford.
meeting us at his ship in two minutes, said arthur with a shrug which in-
dicated total abdication of thought. they started off towards it. strange
sounds reached their ears. they tried not to listen, but could not help notic-
ing that slartibartfast was querulously demanding that he be given the silver
urn containing the ashes, as they were, he said, vitally important for the
past, present and future safety of the galaxy, and that this was causing wild
hilarity. they resolved to ignore it.
what happened next they could not ignore. with a noise like a hundred thou-
sand people saying wop, a steely white spaceship suddenly seemed to create
itself out of nothing in the air directly above the cricket pitch and hung there
with infinite menace and a slight hum.
then for a while it did nothing, as if it expected everybody to go about their
normal business and not mind it just hanging there.
then it did something quite extraordinary. or rather,

it opened up and

27

let something quite extraordinary come out of it, eleven quite extraordinary
things.
they were robots, white robots.
what was most extraordinary about them was that they appeared to have
come dressed for the occasion. not only were they white, but they carried
what appeared to be cricket bats, and not only that, but they also carried
what appeared to be cricket balls, and not only that but they wore white rib-
bing pads round the lower parts of their legs. these last were extraordinary
because they appeared to contain jets which allowed these curiously civilized
robots to fly down from their hovering spaceship and start to kill people, which
is what they did
hello, said arthur, something seems to be happening.
get to the ship, shouted ford. i dont want to know, i dont want to see, i
dont want to hear, he yelled as he ran, this is not my planet, i didnt choose
to be here, i dont want to get involved, just get me out of here, and get me
to a party, with people i can relate to!
smoke and flame billowed from the pitch.
well, the supernatural brigade certainly seems to be out in force here today
... burbled a radio happily to itself.
what i need, shouted ford, by way of clarifying his previous remarks, is a
strong drink and a peer-group. he continued to run, pausing only for a mo-
ment to grab arthurs arm and drag him along with him. arthur had adopted
his normal crisis role, which was to stand with his mouth hanging open and
let it all wash over him.
theyre playing cricket, muttered arthur, stumbling along after ford. i
swear they are playing cricket. i do not know why they are doing this, but
that is what they are doing. theyre not just killing people, theyre sending
them up, he shouted, ford, theyre sending us up!
it would have been hard to disbelieve this without knowing a great deal more
galactic history than arthur had so far managed to pick up in his travels.
the ghostly but violent shapes that could be seen moving within the thick
pall of smoke seemed to be performing a series of bizarre parodies of batting
strokes, the difference being that every ball they struck with their bats ex-
ploded wherever it landed. the very first one of these had dispelled arthurs
initial reaction, that the whole thing might just be a publicity stunt by aus-
tralian margarine manufacturers.
and then, as suddenly as it had all started, it was over. the eleven white
robots ascended through the seething cloud in a tight formation, and with a
few last flashes of flame entered the bowels of their hovering white ship, which,
with the noise of a hundred thousand people saying foop, promptly vanished

28

chapter 3.

into the thin air out of which it had wopped.
for a moment there was a terrible stunned silence, and then out of the drifting
smoke emerged the pale figure of slartibartfast looking even more like moses
because in spite of the continued absence of the mountain he was at least now
striding across a fiery and smoking well-mown lawn.
he stared wildly about him until he saw the hurrying figures of arthur dent
and ford prefect forcing their way through the frightened crowd which was
for the moment busy stampeding in the opposite direction. the crowd was
clearly thinking to itself about what an unusual day this was turning out to
be, and not really knowing which way, if any, to turn.
slartibartfast was gesturing urgently at ford and arthur and shouting at them,
as the three of them gradually converged on his ship, still parked behind the
sight-screens and still apparently unnoticed by the crowd stampeding past it
who presumably had enough of their own problems to cope with at that time.
theyve garble warble farble! shouted slartibartfast in his thin tremulous
voice.
what did he say? panted ford as he elbowed his way onwards.
arthur shook his head.
theyve ... something or other, he said.
theyve table warble farble! shouted slartibartfast again.
ford and arthur shook their heads at each other.
it sounds urgent, said arthur. he stopped and shouted.
what?
theyve garble warble fashes! cried slartibartfast, still waving at them.
he says, said arthur, that theyve taken the ashes. that is what i think
he says. they ran on.
the ...? said ford.
ashes, said arthur tersely. the burnt remains of a cricket stump. its a
trophy. that ... he was panting, is ... apparently ... what they ... have
come and taken. he shook his head very slightly as if he was trying to get
his brain to settle down lower in his skull.
strange thing to want to tell us, snapped ford.
strange thing to take.
strange ship.
they had arrived at it. the second strangest thing about the ship was watch-
ing the somebody elses problem field at work. they could now clearly see
the ship for what it was simply because they knew it was there. it was quite
apparent, however, that nobody else could. this wasnt because it was actu-
ally invisible or anything hyper-impossible like that. the technology involved
in making anything invisible is so infinitely complex that nine hundred and

29

ninety-nine thousand million, nine hundred and ninety-nine million, nine hun-
dred and ninety-nine thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine times out of a
billion it is much simpler and more effective just to take the thing away and
do without it. the ultra-famous sciento-magician effrafax of wug once bet
his life that, given a year, he could render the great megamountain magramal
entirely invisible.
having spent most of the year jiggling around with immense lux- o-valves
and refracto-nullifiers and spectrum-bypass-o-matics, he realized, with nine
hours to go, that he wasnt going to make it.
so, he and his friends, and his friends friends, and his friends friends friends,
and his friends friends friends friends, and some rather less good friends of
theirs who happened to own a major stellar trucking company, put in what
now is widely recognized as being the hardest nights work in history, and, sure
enough, on the following day, magramal was no longer visible. effrafax lost his
bet - and therefore his life - simply because some pedantic adjudicating official
noticed (a) that when walking around the area that magramal ought to be he
didnt trip over or break his nose on anything, and (b) a suspicious-looking
extra moon.
the somebody elses problem field is much simpler and more effective, and
whats more can be run for over a hundred years on a single torch battery.
this is because it relies on peoples natural disposition not to see anything they
dont want to, werent expecting, or cant explain. if effrafax had painted the
mountain pink and erected a cheap and simple somebody elses problem field
on it, then people would have walked past the mountain, round it, even over
it, and simply never have noticed that the thing was there.
and this is precisely what was happening with slartibartfasts ship. it wasnt
pink, but if it had been, that would have been the least of its visual problems
and people were simply ignoring it like anything.
the most extraordinary thing about it was that it looked only partly like a
spaceship with guidance fins, rocket engines and escape hatches and so on,
and a great deal like a small upended italian bistro.
ford and arthur gazed up at it with wonderment and deeply offended sensi-
bilities.
yes, i know, said slartibartfast, hurrying up to them at that point, breath-
less and agitated, but there is a reason. come, we must go. the ancient
nightmare is come again. doom confronts us all. we must leave at once.
i fancy somewhere sunny, said ford.
ford and arthur followed slartibartfast into the ship and were so perplexed
by what they saw inside it that they were totally unaware of what happened
next outside.

30

chapter 3.

a spaceship, yet another one, but this one sleek and silver, descended from the
sky on to the pitch, quietly, without fuss, its long legs unlocking in a smooth
ballet of technology.
it landed gently. it extended a short ramp. a tall grey-green figure marched
briskly out and approached the small knot of people who were gathered in the
centre of the pitch tending to the casualties of the recent bizarre massacre. it
moved people aside with quiet, understated authority, and came at last to a
man lying in a desperate pool of blood, clearly now beyond the reach of any
earthly medicine, breathing, coughing his last. the figure knelt down quietly
beside him.
arthur philip deodat? asked the figure.
the man, with horrified confusion in eyes, nodded feebly.
youre a no-good dumbo nothing, whispered the creature. i thought you
should know that before you went.



important facts from galactic history, number two:
(reproduced from the siderial daily mentioners book of popular galactic
history.)
since this galaxy began, vast civilizations have risen and fallen, risen and
fallen, risen and fallen so often that its quite tempting to think that life in
the galaxy must be
(a) something akin to seasick - space-sick, time sick, history sick or some such
thing, and
(b) stupid.32

chapter 4.



it seemed to arthur as if the whole sky suddenly just stood aside and let them
through.
it seemed to him that the atoms of his brain and the atoms of the cosmos were
streaming through each other.
it seemed to him that he was blown on the wind of the universe, and that the
wind was him.
it seemed to him that he was one of the thoughts of the universe and that the
universe was a thought of his.
it seemed to the people at lords cricket ground that another north london
restaurant had just come and gone as they so often do, and that this was
somebody elses problem.
what happened? whispered arthur in considerable awe.
we took off, said slartibartfast.
arthur lay in startled stillness on the acceleration couch. he wasnt certain
whether he had just got space-sickness or religion.
nice mover, said ford in an unsuccessful attempt to disguise the degree
to which he had been impressed by what slartibartfasts ship had just done,
shame about the decor.
for a moment or two the old man didnt reply. he was staring at the instru-
ments with the air of one who is trying to convert fahrenheit to centigrade in
his head whilst his house is burning down. then his brow cleared and he stared
for a moment at the wide panoramic screen in front of him, which displayed a
bewildering complexity of stars streaming like silver threads around them.
his lips moved as if he was trying to spell something. suddenly his eyes darted
in alarm back to his instruments, but then his expression merely subsided into
a steady frown. he looked back up at the screen. he felt his own pulse. his
frown deepened for a moment, then he relaxed.
its a mistake to try and understand mathematics, he said, they only worry34

chapter 5.

me. what did you say?
decor, said ford. pity about it.
deep in the fundamental heart of mind and universe, said slartibartfast,
there is a reason.
ford glanced sharply around. he clearly thought this was taking an optimistic
view of things.
the interior of the flight deck was dark green, dark red, dark brown, cramped
and moodily lit. inexplicably, the resemblance to a small italian bistro had
failed to end at the hatchway. small pools of light picked out pot plants, glazed
tiles and all sorts of little unidentifiable brass things.
rafia-wrapped bottles lurked hideously in the shadows.
the instruments which had occupied slartibartfasts attention seemed to be
mounted in the bottom of bottles which were set in concrete.
ford reached out and touched it.
fake concrete. plastic. fake bottles set in fake concrete.
the fundamental heart of mind and universe can take a running jump, he
thought to himself, this is rubbish. on the other hand, it could not be denied
that the way the ship had moved made the heart of gold seem like an electric
pram.
he swung himself off the couch. he brushed himself down. he looked at
arthur who was singing quietly to himself. he looked at the screen and rec-
ognized nothing. he looked at slartibartfast.
how far did we just travel? he said.
about ... said slartibartfast, about two thirds of the way across the galac-
tic disc, i would say, roughly. yes, roughly two thirds, i think.
its a strange thing, said arthur quietly, that the further and faster one
travels across the universe, the more ones position in it seems to be largely
immaterial, and one is filled with a profound, or rather emptied of a ...
yes, very strange, said ford. where are we going?
we are going, said slartibartfast, to confront an ancient nightmare of the
universe.
and where are you going to drop us off?
i will need your help.
tough. look, theres somewhere you can take us where we can have fun, im
trying to think of it, we can get drunk and maybe listen to some extremely
evil music. hold on, ill look it up. he dug out his copy of the hitch hikers
guide to the galaxy and tipped through those parts of the index primarily
concerned with sex and drugs and rock and roll.
a curse has arisen from the mists of time, said slartibartfast.
yes, i expect so, said ford. hey, he said, lighting accidentally on one par-

35

ticular reference entry, eccentrica gallumbits, did you ever meet her? the
triple-breasted whore of eroticon six. some people say her erogenous zones
start some four miles from her actual body. me, i disagree, i say five.
a curse, said slartibartfast, which will engulf the galaxy in fire and de-
struction, and possibly bring the universe to a premature doom. i mean it,
he added.
sounds like a bad time, said ford, with look ill be drunk enough not to
notice. here, he said, stabbing his finger at the screen of the guide, would
be a really wicked place to go, and i think we should. what do you say,
arthur? stop mumbling mantras and pay attention. theres important stuff
youre missing here.
arthur pushed himself up from his couch and shook his head.
where are we going? he said.
to confront an ancient night-
can it, said ford. arthur, we are going out into the galaxy to have some
fun. is that an idea you can cope with?
whats slartibartfast looking so anxious about? said arthur.
nothing, said ford.
doom, said slartibartfast. come, he added, with sudden authority, there
is much i must show and tell you.
he walked towards a green wrought-iron spiral staircase set incomprehensibly
in the middle of the flight deck and started to ascend. arthur, with a frown,
followed.
ford slung the guide sullenly back into his satchel.
my doctor says that i have a malformed public-duty gland and a natural
deficiency in moral fibre, he muttered to himself, and that i am therefore
excused from saving universes.
nevertheless, he stomped up the stairs behind them.
what they found upstairs was just stupid, or so it seemed, and ford shook his
head, buried his face in his hands and slumped against a pot plant, crushing
it against the wall.
the central computational area, said slartibartfast unperturbed, this is
where every calculation affecting the ship in any way is performed. yes i
know what it looks like, but it is in fact a complex four-dimensional topo-
graphical map of a series of highly complex mathematical functions.
it looks like a joke, said arthur.
i know what it looks like, said slartibartfast, and went into it. as he did
so, arthur had a sudden vague flash of what it might mean, but he refused to
believe it. the universe could not possibly work like that, he thought, cannot
possibly. that, he thought to himself, would be as absurd as ... he terminated

36

chapter 5.

that line of thinking. most of the really absurd things he could think of had
already happened.
and this was one of them.
it was a large glass cage, or box - in fact a room.
in it was a table, a long one. around it were gathered about a dozen chairs,
of the bentwood style. on it was a tablecloth - a grubby, red and white check
tablecloth, scarred with the occasional cigarette burn, each, presumably, at a
precise calculated mathematical position.
and on the tablecloth sat some half-eaten italian meals, hedged about with
half-eaten breadsticks and half-drunk glasses of wine, and toyed with listlessly
by robots.
it was all completely artificial. the robot customers were attended by a robot
waiter, a robot wine waiter and a robot maetre d. the furniture was artificial,
the tablecloth artificial, and each particular piece of food was clearly capable
of exhibiting all the mechanical characteristics of, say, a pollo sorpreso, with-
out actually being one.
and all participated in a little dance together - a complex routine involving the
manipulation of menus, bill pads, wallets, cheque books, credit cards, watches,
pencils and paper napkins, which seemed to be hovering constantly on the
edge of violence, but never actually getting anywhere.
slartibartfast hurried in, and then appeared to pass the time of day quite idly
with the maetre d, whilst one of the customer robots, an autorory, slid slowly
under the table, mentioning what he intended to do to some guy over some
girl.
slartibartfast took over the seat which had been thus vacated and passed a
shrewd eye over the menu. the tempo of the routine round the table seemed
somehow imperceptibly to quicken. arguments broke out, people attempted
to prove things on napkins. they waved fiercely at each other, and attempted
to examine each others pieces of chicken. the waiters hand began to move
on the bill pad more quickly than a human hand could manage, and then more
quickly than a human eye could follow. the pace accelerated. soon, an ex-
traordinary and insistent politeness overwhelmed the group, and seconds later
it seemed that a moment of consensus was suddenly achieved. a new vibration
thrilled through the ship.
slartibartfast emerged from the glass room.
bistromathics, he said. the most powerful computational force known to
parascience. come to the room of informational illusions.
he swept past and carried them bewildered in his wake.



the bistromatic drive is a wonderful new method of crossing vast interstellar
distances without all that dangerous mucking about with improbability fac-
tors.
bistromathics itself is simply a revolutionary new way of understanding the
behaviour of numbers. just as einstein observed that time was not an absolute
but depended on the observers movement in space, and that space was not an
absolute, but depended on the observers movement in time, so it is now real-
ized that numbers are not absolute, but depend on the observers movement
in restaurants.
the first non-absolute number is the number of people for whom the table is
reserved. this will vary during the course of the first three telephone calls to
the restaurant, and then bear no apparent relation to the number of people
who actually turn up, or to the number of people who subsequently join them
after the show/match/party/gig, or to the number of people who leave when
they see who else has turned up.
the second non-absolute number is the given time of arrival, which is now
known to be one of those most bizarre of mathematical concepts, a recipriver-
sexcluson, a number whose existence can only be defined as being anything
other than itself. in other words, the given time of arrival is the one moment
of time at which it is impossible that any member of the party will arrive. re-
cipriversexclusons now play a vital part in many branches of maths, including
statistics and accountancy and also form the basic equations used to engineer
the somebody elses problem field.
the third and most mysterious piece of non-absoluteness of all lies in the re-
lationship between the number of items on the bill, the cost of each item, the
number of people at the table, and what they are each prepared to pay for.
(the number of people who have actually brought any money is only a sub-
phenomenon in this field.)38

chapter 6.

the baffling discrepancies which used to occur at this point remained uninves-
tigated for centuries simply because no one took them seriously. they were at
the time put down to such things as politeness, rudeness, meanness, flashness,
tiredness, emotionality, or the lateness of the hour, and completely forgotten
about on the following morning. they were never tested under laboratory
conditions, of course, because they never occurred in laboratories - not in rep-
utable laboratories at least.
and so it was only with the advent of pocket computers that the startling
truth became finally apparent, and it was this:
numbers written on restaurant bills within the confines of restaurants do not
follow the same mathematical laws as numbers written on any other pieces of
paper in any other parts of the universe.
this single fact took the scientific world by storm. it completely revolution-
ized it. so many mathematical conferences got held in such good restaurants
that many of the finest minds of a generation died of obesity and heart failure
and the science of maths was put back by years.
slowly, however, the implications of the idea began to be understood. to
begin with it had been too stark, too crazy, too much what the man in the
street would have said, oh yes, i could have told you that, about. then
some phrases like interactive subjectivity frameworks were invented, and
everybody was able to relax and get on with it.
the small groups of monks who had taken up hanging around the major re-
search institutes singing strange chants to the effect that the universe was
only a figment of its own imagination were eventually given a street theatre
grant and went away.



in space travel, you see, said slartibartfast, as he fiddled with some instru-
ments in the room of informational illusions, in space travel ...
he stopped and looked about him.
the room of informational illusions was a welcome relief after the visual mon-
strosities of the central computational area. there was nothing in it. no infor-
mation, no illusions, just themselves, white walls and a few small instruments
which looked as if they were meant to plug into something which slartibartfast
couldnt find.
yes? urged arthur. he had picked up slartibartfasts sense of urgency but
didnt know what to do with it.
yes what? said the old man.
you were saying?
slartibartfast looked at him sharply.
the numbers, he said, are awful. he resumed his search.
arthur nodded wisely to himself. after a while he realized that this wasnt
getting him anywhere and decided that he would say what? after all.
in space travel, repeated slartibartfast, all the numbers are awful.
arthur nodded again and looked round to ford for help, but ford was prac-
tising being sullen and getting quite good at it.
i was only, said slartibartfast with a sigh, trying to save you the trouble of
asking me why all the ships computations were being done on a waiters bill
pad.
arthur frowned.
why, he said, were all the ships computations being done on a wait-
he stopped.
slartibartfast said, because in space travel all the numbers are awful.
he could tell that he wasnt getting his point across.
listen, he said. on a waiters bill pad numbers dance. you must have40

chapter 7.

encountered the phenomenon.
well ...
on a waiters bill pad, said slartibartfast, reality and unreality collide on
such a fundamental level that each becomes the other and anything is possible,
within certain parameters.
what parameters?
its impossible to say, said slartibartfast. thats one of them. strange but
true. at least, i think its strange, he added, and im assured that its true.
at that moment he located the slot in the wall for which he had been search-
ing, and clicked the instrument he was holding into it.
do not be alarmed, he said, and then suddenly darted an alarmed look at
himself, and lunged back, its ...
they didnt hear what he said, because at that moment the ship winked out
of existence around them and a starbattle-ship the size of a small midlands
industrial city plunged out of the sundered night towards them, star lasers
ablaze.
they gaped, pop-eyed, and were unable to scream.



another world, another day, another dawn.
the early mornings thinnest sliver of light appeared silently.
several billion trillion tons of superhot exploding hydrogen nuclei rose slowly
above the horizon and managed to look small, cold and slightly damp.
there is a moment in every dawn when light floats, there is the possibility of
magic. creation holds its breath.
the moment passed as it regularly did on squornshellous zeta, without inci-
dent.
the mist clung to the surface of the marshes. the swamp trees were grey with
it, the tall reeds indistinct. it hung motionless like held breath.
nothing moved.
there was silence.
the sun struggled feebly with the mist, tried to impart a little warmth here,
shed a little light there, but clearly today was going to be just another long
haul across the sky.
nothing moved.
again, silence.
nothing moved.
silence.
very often on squornshellous zeta, whole days would go on like this, and this
was indeed going to be one of them.
fourteen hours later the sun sank hopelessly beneath the opposite horizon with
a sense of totally wasted effort.
and a few hours later it reappeared, squared its shoulders and started on up
the sky again.
this time, however, something was happening. a mattress had just met a
robot.
hello, robot, said the mattress.42

chapter 8.

bleah, said the robot and continued what it was doing, which was walking
round very slowly in a very tiny circle.
happy? said the mattress.
the robot stopped and looked at the mattress. it looked at it quizzically. it
was clearly a very stupid mattress. it looked back at him with wide eyes.
after what it had calculated to ten significant decimal places as being the
precise length of pause most likely to convey a general contempt for all things
mattressy, the robot continued to walk round in tight circles.
we could have a conversation, said the mattress, would you like that?
it was a large mattress, and probably one of quite high quality. very few things
actually get manufactured these days, because in an infinitely large universe
such as, for instance, the one in which we live, most things one could possibly
imagine, and a lot of things one would rather not, grow somewhere. a forest
was discovered recently in which most of the trees grew ratchet screwdrivers
as fruit. the life cycle of ratchet screwdriver fruit it quite interesting. once
picked it needs a dark dusty drawer in which it can lie undisturbed for years.
then one night it suddenly hatches, discards its outer skin which crumbles into
dust, and emerges as a totally unidentifiable little metal object with flanges
at both ends and a sort of ridge and a sort of hole for a screw. this, when
found, will get thrown away. no one knows what it is supposed to gain from
this. nature, in her infinite wisdom, is presumably working on it.
no one really knows what mattresses are meant to gain from their lives either.
they are large, friendly, pocket-sprung creatures which live quiet private lives
in the marshes of squornshellous zeta. many of them get caught, slaughtered,
dried out, shipped out and slept on. none of them seem to mind and all of
them are called zem.
no, said marvin.
my name, said the mattress, is zem. we could discuss the weather a little.
marvin paused again in his weary circular plod.
the dew, he observed, has clearly fallen with a particularly sickening thud
this morning.
he resumed his walk, as if inspired by this conversational outburst to fresh
heights of gloom and despondency. he plodded tenaciously.
if he had had
teeth he would have gritted them at this point. he hadnt. he didnt. the
mere plod said it all.
the mattress flolloped around. this is a thing that only live mattresses in
swamps are able to do, which is why the word is not in more common usage.
it flolloped in a sympathetic sort of way, moving a fairish body of water as it
did so. it blew a few bubbles up through the water engagingly. its blue and
white stripes glistened briefly in a sudden feeble ray of sun that had unexpect-

43

edly made it through the mist, causing the creature to bask momentarily.
marvin plodded.
you have something on your mind, i think, said the mattress floopily.
more than you can possibly imagine, dreaded marvin. my capacity for
mental activity of all kinds is as boundless as the infinite reaches of space
itself. except of course for my capacity for happiness.
stomp, stomp, he went.
my capacity for happiness, he added, you could fit into a matchbox with-
out taking out the matches first.
the mattress globbered. this is the noise made by a live, swamp- dwelling
mattress that is deeply moved by a story of personal tragedy. the word can
also, according to the ultra-complete maximegalon dictionary of every lan-
guage ever, mean the noise made by the lord high sanvalvwag of hollop on
discovering that he has forgotten his wifes birthday for the second year run-
ning. since there was only ever one lord high sanvalvwag of hollop, and he
never married, the word is only ever used in a negative or speculative sense,
and there is an ever-increasing body of opinion which holds that the ultra-
complete maximegalon dictionary is not worth the fleet of lorries it takes to
cart its microstored edition around in. strangely enough, the dictionary omits
the word floopily, which simply means in the manner of something which
is floopy.
the mattress globbered again.
i sense a deep dejection in your diodes, it vollued (for the meaning of the
word vollue, buy a copy of squornshellous swamptalk at any remaindered
bookshop, or alternatively buy the ultra-complete maximegalon dictionary,
as the university will be very glad to get it off their hands and regain some
valuable parking lots), and it saddens me. you should be more mattresslike.
we live quiet retired lives in the swamp, where we are content to flollop and
vollue and regard the wetness in a fairly floopy manner. some of us are killed,
but all of us are called zem, so we never know which and globbering is thus
kept to a minimum. why are you walking in circles?
because my leg is stuck, said marvin simply.
it seems to me, said the mattress eyeing it compassionately, that it is a
pretty poor sort of leg.
you are right, said marvin, it is.
voon, said the mattress.
i expect so, said marvin, and i also expect that you find the idea of a robot
with an artificial leg pretty amusing. you should tell your friends zem and
zem when you see them later; theyll laugh, if i know them, which i dont of
course - except insofar as i know all organic life forms, which is much better

44

chapter 8.

than i would wish to. ha, but my life is but a box of wormgears.
he stomped around again in his tiny circle, around his thin steel peg-leg which
revolved in the mud but seemed otherwise stuck.
but why do you just keep walking round and round? said the mattress.
just to make the point, said marvin, and continued, round and round.
consider it made, my dear friend, flurbled the mattress, consider it made.
just another million years, said marvin, just another quick million. then
i might try it backwards. just for the variety, you understand.
the mattress could feel deep in his innermost spring pockets that the robot
dearly wished to be asked how long he had been trudging in this futile and
fruitless manner, and with another quiet flurble he did so.
oh, just over the one-point-five-million mark, just over, said marvin airily.
ask me if i ever get bored, go on, ask me.
the mattress did.
marvin ignored the question, he merely trudged with added emphasis.
i gave a speech once, he said suddenly, and apparently unconnectedly. you
may not instantly see why i bring the subject up, but that is because my mind
works so phenomenally fast, and i am at a rough estimate thirty billion times
more intelligent than you. let me give you an example. think of a number,
any number.
er, five, said the mattress.
wrong, said marvin. you see?
the mattress was much impressed by this and realized that it was in the pres-
ence of a not unremarkable mind. it willomied along its entire length, sending
excited little ripples through its shallow algae-covered pool.
it gupped.
tell me, it urged, of the speech you once made, i long to hear it.
it was received very badly, said marvin, for a variety of reasons. i delivered
it, he added, pausing to make an awkward humping sort of gesture with his
not-exactly-good arm, but his arm which was better than the other one which
was dishearteningly welded to his left side, over there, about a mile distance.
he was pointing as well as he could manage, and he obviously wanted to make
it totally clear that this was as well as he could manage, through the mist,
over the reeds, to a part of the marsh which looked exactly the same as every
other part of the marsh.
there, he repeated. i was somewhat of a celebrity at the time.
excitement gripped the mattress. it had never heard of speeches being deliv-
ered on squornshellous zeta, and certainly not by celebrities. water spattered
off it as a thrill glurried across its back.
it did something which mattresses very rarely bother to do. summoning every

45

bit of its strength, it reared its oblong body, heaved it up into the air and held
it quivering there for a few seconds whilst it peered through the mist over the
reeds at the part of the marsh which marvin had indicated, observing, without
disappointment, that it was exactly the same as every other part of the marsh.
the effort was too much, and it flodged back into its pool, deluging marvin
with smelly mud, moss and weeds.
i was a celebrity, droned the robot sadly, for a short while on account of my
miraculous and bitterly resented escape from a fate almost as good as death in
the heart of a blazing sun. you can guess from my condition, he added, how
narrow my escape was. i was rescued by a scrap-metal merchant, imagine that.
here i am, brain the size of ... never mind.
he trudged savagely for a few seconds.
he it was who fixed me up with this leg. hateful, isnt it? he sold me to a
mind zoo. i was the star exhibit. i had to sit on a box and tell my story whilst
people told me to cheer up and think positive.
give us a grin, little robot,
they would shout at me, give us a little chuckle. i would explain to them that
to get my face to grin wold take a good couple of hours in a workshop with a
wrench, and that went down very well.
the speech, urged the mattress. i long to hear of the speech you gave in
the marshes.
there was a bridge built across the marshes. a cyberstructured hyper-
bridge, hundreds of miles in length, to carry ion-buggies and freighters over
the swamp.
a bridge? quirruled the mattress. here in the swamp?
a bridge, confirmed marvin, here in the swamp. it was going to revitalize
the economy of the squornshellous system. they spent the entire economy of
the squornshellous system building it. they asked me to open it. poor fools.
it began to rain a little, a fine spray slid through the mist.
i stood on the platform. for hundreds of miles in front of me, and hundreds
of miles behind me, the bridge stretched.
did it glitter? enthused the mattress.
it glittered.
did it span the miles majestically?
it spanned the miles majestically.
did it stretch like a silver thread far out into the invisible mist?
yes, said marvin. do you want to hear this story?
i want to hear your speech, said the mattress.
this is what i said. i said, i would like to say that it is a very great pleasure,
honour and privilege for me to open this bridge, but i cant because my lying
circuits are all out of commission. i hate and despise you all. i now declare

46

chapter 8.

this hapless cyberstructure open to the unthinkable abuse of all who wantonly
cross her. and i plugged myself into the opening circuits.
marvin paused, remembering the moment.
the mattress flurred and glurried. it flolloped, gupped and willomied, doing
this last in a particularly floopy way.
voon, it wurfed at last. and it was a magnificent occasion?
reasonably magnificent. the entire thousand-mile-long bridge spontaneously
folded up its glittering spans and sank weeping into the mire, taking everybody
with it.
there was a sad and terrible pause at this point in the conversation during
which a hundred thousand people seemed unexpectedly to say wop and a
team of white robots descended from the sky like dandelion seeds drifting on
the wind in tight military formation. for a sudden violent moment they were
all there, in the swamp, wrenching marvins false leg off, and then they were
gone again in their ship, which said foop.
you see the sort of thing i have to contend with? said marvin to the gob-
bering mattress.
suddenly, a moment later, the robots were back again for another violent inci-
dent, and this time when they left, the mattress was alone in the swamp. he
flolloped around in astonishment and alarm. he almost lurgled in fear. he
reared himself to see over the reeds, but there was nothing to see, just more
reeds. he listened, but there was no sound on the wind beyond the now famil-
iar sound of half-crazed etymologists calling distantly to each other across the
sullen mire.



the body of arthur dent span.
the universe shattered into a million glittering fragments around it, and each
particular shard span silently through the void, reflecting on its silver surface
some single searing holocaust of fire and destruction.
and then the blackness behind the universe exploded, and each particular
piece of blackness was the furious smoke of hell.
and the nothingness behind the blackness behind the universe erupted, and
behind the nothingness behind the blackness behind the shattered universe
was at last the dark figure of an immense man speaking immense words.
these, then, said the figure, speaking from an immensely comfortable chair,
were the krikkit wars, the greatest devastation ever visited upon our galaxy.
what you have experienced ...
slartibartfast floated past, waving.
its just a documentary, he called out. this is not a good bit. terribly
sorry, trying to find the rewind control ...
... is what billions of billions of innocent ...
do not, called out slartibartfast floating past again, and fiddling furiously
with the thing that he had stuck into the wall of the room of informational
illusions and which was in fact still stuck there, agree to buy anything at this
point.
... people, creatures, your fellow beings ...
music swelled - again, it was immense music, immense chords. and behind the
man, slowly, three tall pillars began to emerge out of the immensely swirling
mist.
... experienced, lived through - or, more often, failed to live through. think
of that, my friends. and let us not forget - and in just a moment i shall be
able to suggest a way which will help us always to remember - that before the
krikkit wars, the galaxy was that rare and wonderful thing a happy galaxy!48

chapter 9.

the music was going bananas with immensity at this point.
a happy galaxy, my friends, as represented by the symbol of the wikkit
gate!
the three pillars stood out clearly now, three pillars topped with two cross
pieces in a way which looked stupefyingly familiar to arthurs addled brain.
the three pillars, thundered the man. the steel pillar which represented
the strength and power of the galaxy!
searchlights seared out and danced crazy dances up and down the pillar on
the left which was, clearly, made of steel or something very like it. the music
thumped and bellowed.
the perspex pillar, announced the man, representing the forces of science
and reason in the galaxy!
other searchlights played exotically up and down the righthand, transparent
pillar creating dazzling patterns within it and a sudden inexplicable craving
for ice-cream in the stomach of arthur dent.
and, the thunderous voice continued, the wooden pillar, representing ...
and here his voice became just very slightly hoarse with wonderful sentiments,
the forces of nature and spirituality.
the lights picked out the central pillar. the music moved bravely up into the
realms of complete unspeakability.
between them supporting, the voice rolled on, approaching its climax, the
golden bail of prosperity and the silver bail of peace!
the whole structure was now flooded with dazzling lights, and the music had
now, fortunately, gone far beyond the limits of the discernible. at the top
of the three pillars the two brilliantly gleaming bails sat and dazzled. there
seemed to be girls sitting on top of them, or maybe they were meant to be
angels. angels are usually represented as wearing more than that, though.
suddenly there was a dramatic hush in what was presumably meant to be the
cosmos, and a darkening of the lights.
there is not a world, thrilled the mans expert voice, not a civilized world
in the galaxy where this symbol is not revered even today. even in primitive
worlds it persists in racial memories. this it was that the forces of krikkit de-
stroyed, and this it is that now locks their world away till the end of eternity!
and with a flourish, the man produced in his hands a model of the wikkit
gate. scale was terribly hard to judge in this whole extraordinary spectacle,
but the model looked as if it must have been about three feet high.
not the original key, of course. that, as everyone knows, was destroyed,
blasted into the ever-whirling eddies of the space- time continuum and lost for
ever. this is a remarkable replica, hand-tooled by skilled craftsmen, lovingly
assembled using ancient craft secrets into a memento you will be proud to own,

49

in memory of those who fell, and in tribute to the galaxy - our galaxy - which
they died to defend ...
slartibartfast floated past again at this moment.
found it, he said. we can lose all this rubbish. just dont nod, thats all.
now, let us bow our heads in payment, intoned the voice, and then said it
again, much faster and backwards.
lights came and went, the pillars disappeared, the man gabled himself back-
wards into nothing, the universe snappily reassembled itself around them.
you get the gist? said slartibartfast.
im astonished, said arthur, and bewildered.
i was asleep, said ford, who floated into view at this point. did i miss
anything?
they found themselves once again teetering rather rapidly on the edge of an
agonizingly high cliff. the wind whipped out from their faces and across a
bay on which the remains of one of the greatest and most powerful space
battle-fleets ever assembled in the galaxy was briskly burning itself back into
existence. the sky was a sullen pink, darkening via a rather curious colour to
blue and upwards to black. smoke billowed down out of it at an incredible
lick.
events were now passing back by them almost too quickly to be distinguished,
and when, a short while later, a huge starbattle- ship rushed away from them
as if theyd said boo, they only just recognized it as the point at which they
had come in.
but now things were too rapid, a video-tactile blur which brushed and jiggled
them through centuries of galactic history, turning, twisting, flickering. the
sound was a mere thin thrill.
periodically through the thickening jumble of events they sensed appalling
catastrophes, deep horrors, cataclysmic shocks, and these were always asso-
ciated with certain recurring images, the only images which ever stood out
clearly from the avalance of tumbling history: a wicket gate, a small hard red
ball, hard white robots, and also something less distinct, something dark and
cloudy.
but there was also another sensation which rose clearly out of the thrilling
passage of time.
just as a slow series of clicks when speeded up will lose the definition of each
individual click and gradually take on the quality of a sustained and rising
tone, so a series of individual impressions here took on the quality of a sus-
tained emotion - and yet not an emotion. if it was an emotion, it was a totally
emotionless one. it was hatred, implacable hatred. it was cold, not like ice
is cold, but like a wall is cold. it was impersonal, not as a randomly flung

50

chapter 9.

fist in a crowd is impersonal, but like a computer-issued parking summons is
impersonal. and it was deadly - again, not like a bullet or a knife is deadly,
but like a brick wall across a motorway is deadly.
and just as a rising tone will change in character and take on harmonics as
it rises, so again, this emotionless emotion seemed to rise to an unbearable if
unheard scream and suddenly seemed to be a scream of guilt and failure.
and suddenly it stopped.
they were left standing on a quiet hilltop on a tranquil evening.
the sun was setting.
all around them softly undulating green countryside rolled off gently into the
distance. birds sang about what they thought of it all, and the general opinion
seemed to be good. a little way away could be heard the sound of children
playing, and a little further away than the apparent source of that sound could
be seen in the dimming evening light the outlines of a small town.
the town appeared to consist mostly of fairly low buildings made of white
stone. the skyline was of gentle pleasing curves.
the sun had nearly set.
as if out of nowhere, music began. slartibartfast tugged at a switch and it
stopped.
a voice said, this ... slartibartfast tugged at a switch and it stopped.
i will tell you about it, he said quietly.
the place was peaceful. arthur felt happy. even ford seemed cheerful. they
walked a short way in the direction of the town, and the informational illusion
of the grass was pleasant and springy under their feet, and the informational
illusion of the flowers smelt sweet and fragrant. only slartibartfast seemed
apprehensive and out of sorts.
he stopped and looked up.
it suddenly occurred to arthur that, coming as this did at the end, so to speak,
or rather the beginning of all the horror they had just blurredly experienced,
something nasty must be about to happen. he was distressed to think that
something nasty could happen to somewhere as idyllic as this. he too glanced
up. there was nothing in the sky.
theyre not about to attack here, are they? he said. he realized that this
was merely a recording he was walking through, but he still felt alarmed.
nothing is about to attack here, said slartibartfast in a voice which unex-
pectedly trembled with emotion. this is where it all started. this is the
place itself. this is krikkit.
he stared up into the sky.
the sky, from one horizon to another, from east to west, from north to south,
was utterly and completely black.

51

52

chapter 9.



stomp stomp.
whirrr.
pleased to be of service.
shut up.
thank you.
stomp stomp stomp stomp stomp.
whirrr.
thank you for making a simple door very happy.
hope your diodes rot.
thank you. have a nice day.
stomp stomp stomp stomp.
whirrr.
it is my pleasure to open for you ...
zark off.
... and my satisfaction to close again with the knowledge of a job well done.
i said zark off.
thank you for listening to this message.
stomp stomp stomp stomp.
wop.
zaphod stopped stomping. he had been stomping around the heart of gold
for days, and so far no door had said wop to him. he was fairly certain that
no door had said wop to him now. it was not the sort of thing doors said.
too concise. furthermore, there were not enough doors. it sounded as if a
hundred thousand people had said wop, which puzzled him because he was
the only person on the ship.
it was dark. most of the ships non-essential systems were closed down. it was
drifting in a remote area of the galaxy, deep in the inky blackness of space.
so which particular hundred thousand people would turn up at this point and54

chapter 10.

say a totally unexpected wop?
he looked about him, up the corridor and down the corridor. it was all in
deep shadow. there were just the very dim pinkish outlines of the doors
which glowed in the dark and pulsed whenever they spoke, though he had
tried every way he could think of of stopping them.
the lights were off so that his heads could avoid looking at each other, because
neither of them was currently a particularly engaging sight, and nor had they
been since he had made the error of looking into his soul.
it had indeed been an error. it had been late one night - of course.
it had been a difficult day - of course.
there had been soulful music playing on the ships sound system - of course.
and he had, of course, been slightly drunk.
in other words, all the usual conditions which bring on a bout of soul-searching
had applied, but it had, nevertheless, clearly been an error.
standing now, silent and alone in the dark corridor he remembered the mo-
ment and shivered. his one head looked one way and his other the other and
each decided that the other was the way to go.
he listened but could hear nothing.
all there had been was the wop.
it seemed an awfully long way to bring an awfully large number of people just
to say one word.
he started nervously to edge his way in the direction of the bridge. there at
least he would feel in control. he stopped again. the way he was feeling he
didnt think he was an awfully good person to be in control.
the first shock of that moment, thinking back, had been discovering that he
actually had a soul.
in fact hed always more or less assumed that he had one as he had a full
complement of everything else, and indeed two of somethings, but suddenly
actually to encounter the thing lurking there deep within him had giving him
a severe jolt.
and then to discover (this was the second shock) that it wasnt the totally
wonderful object which he felt a man in his position had a natural right to
expect had jolted him again.
then he had thought about what his position actually was and the renewed
shock had nearly made him spill his drink. he drained it quickly before any-
thing serious happened to it. he then had another quick one to follow the first
one down and check that it was all right.
freedom, he said aloud.
trillian came on to the bridge at that point and said several enthusiastic things
on the subject of freedom.

55

i cant cope with it, he said darkly, and sent a third drink down to see why
the second hadnt yet reported on the condition of the first. he looked uncer-
tainly at both of her and preferred the one on the right.
he poured a drink down his other throat with the plan that it would head the
previous one off at the pass, join forces with it, and together they would get
the second to pull itself together. then all three would go off in search of the
first, give it a good talking to and maybe a bit of a sing as well.
he felt uncertain as to whether the fourth drink had understood all that, so he
sent down a fifth to explain the plan more fully and a sixth for moral support.
youre drinking too much, said trillian.
his heads collided trying to sort out the four of her he could now see into
a whole position. he gave up and looked at the navigation screen and was
astonished to see a quite phenomenal number of stars.
excitement and adventure and really wild things, he muttered.
look, she said in a sympathetic tone of voice, and sat down near him, its
quite understandable that youre going to feel a little aimless for a bit.
he boggled at her. he had never seen anyone sit on their own lap before.
wow, he said. he had another drink.
youve finished the mission youve been on for years.
i havent been on it. ive tried to avoid being on it.
youve still finished it.
he grunted. there seemed to be a terrific party going on in his stomach.
i think it finished me, he said. here i am, zaphod beeblebrox, i can go
anywhere, do anything. i have the greatest ship in the know sky, a girl with
whom things seem to be working out pretty well ...
are they?
as far as i can tell im not an expert in personal relationships ...
trillian raised her eyebrows.
i am, he added, one hell of a guy, i can do anything i want only i just dont
have the faintest idea what.
he paused.
one thing, he further added, has suddenly ceased to lead to another - in
contradiction of which he had another drink and slid gracelessly off his chair.
whilst he slept it off, trillian did a little research in the ships copy of the
hitch hikers guide to the galaxy. it had some advice to offer on drunken-
ness.
go to it, it said, and good luck.
it was cross-referenced to the entry concerning the size of the universe and
ways of coping with that.
then she found the entry on han wavel, an exotic holiday planet, and one of

56

chapter 10.

the wonders of the galaxy.
han wavel is a world which consists largely of fabulous ultra- luxury hotels
and casinos, all of which have been formed by the natural erosion of wind and
rain.
the chances of this happening are more or less one to infinity against. little is
known of how this came about because none of the geophysicists, probability
statisticians, meteoranalysts or bizzarrologists who are so keen to research it
can afford to stay there.
terrific, thought trillian to herself, and within a few hours the great white
running-shoe ship was slowly powering down out of the sky beneath a hot bril-
liant sun towards a brightly coloured sandy spaceport. the ship was clearly
causing a sensation on the ground, and trillian was enjoying herself. she heard
zaphod moving around and whistling somewhere in the ship.
how are you? she said over the general intercom.
fine, he said brightly, terribly well.
where are you?
in the bathroom.
what are you doing?
staying here.
after an hour or two it became plain that he meant it and the ship returned
to the sky without having once opened its hatchway.
heigh ho, said eddie the computer.
trillian nodded patiently, tapped her fingers a couple of times and pushed the
intercom switch.
i think that enforced fun is probably not what you need at this point.
probably not, replied zaphod from wherever he was.
i think a bit of physical challenge would help draw you out of yourself.
whatever you think, i think, said zaphod.
recreational impossibilities was a heading which caught trillians eye when,
a short while later, she sat down to flip through the guide again, and as the
heart of gold rushed at improbable speeds in an indeterminate direction, she
sipped a cup of something undrinkable from the nutrimatic drink dispenser
and read about how to fly.
the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy has this to say on the subject of flying.
there is an art, it says, or rather a knack to flying.
the knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground and miss.
pick a nice day, it suggests, and try it.
the first part is easy.
all it requires is simply the ability to throw yourself forward with all your
weight, and the willingness not to mind that its going to hurt.

57

that is, its going to hurt if you fail to miss the ground.
most people fail to miss the ground, and if they are really trying properly, the
likelihood is that they will fail to miss it fairly hard.
clearly, its the second point, the missing, which presents the difficulties.
one problem is that you have to miss the ground accidentally. its no good de-
liberately intending to miss the ground because you wont. you have to have
your attention suddenly distracted by something else when youre halfway
there, so that you are no longer thinking about falling, or about the ground,
or about how much its going to hurt if you fail to miss it.
it is notoriously difficult to prise your attention away from these three things
during the split second you have at your disposal. hence most peoples fail-
ure, and their eventual disillusionment with this exhilarating and spectacular
sport.
if, however, you are lucky enough to have your attention momentarily dis-
tracted at the crucial moment by, say, a gorgeous pair of legs (tentacles, pseu-
dopodia, according to phyllum and/or personal inclination) or a bomb going
off in your vicinity, or by suddenly spotting an extremely rare species of beetle
crawling along a nearby twig, then in your astonishment you will miss the
ground completely and remain bobbing just a few inches above it in what
might seem to be a slightly foolish manner.
this is a moment for superb and delicate concentration.
bob and float, float and bob.
ignore all considerations of your own weight and simply let yourself waft higher.
do not listen to what anybody says to you at this point because they are un-
likely to say anything helpful.
they are most likely to say something along the lines of, good god, you
cant possibly be flying!
it is vitally important not to believe them or they will suddenly be right.
waft higher and higher.
try a few swoops, gentle ones at first, then drift above the treetops breathing
regularly.
do not wave at anybody.
when you have done this a few times you will find the moment of distraction
rapidly becomes easier and easier to achieve.
you will then learn all sorts of things about how to control your flight, your
speed, your manoeuvrability, and the trick usually lies in not thinking too
hard about whatever you want to do, but just allowing it to happen as if it
was going to anyway.
you will also learn how to land properly, which is something you will almost
certainly cock up, and cock up badly, on your first attempt.

58

chapter 10.

there are private flying clubs you can join which help you achieve the all-
important moment of distraction. they hire people with surprising bodies or
opinions to leap out from behind bushes and exhibit and/or explain them at
the crucial moments. few genuine hitch-hikers will be able to afford to join
these clubs, but some may be able to get temporary employment at them.
trillian read this longingly, but reluctantly decided that zaphod wasnt re-
ally in the right frame of mind for attempting to fly, or for walking through
mountains or for trying to get the brantisvogan civil service to acknowledge
a change-of-address card, which were the other things listed under the heading
recreational impossibilities.
instead, she flew the ship to allosimanius syneca, a world of ice, snow, mind-
hurtling beauty and stunning cold. the trek from the snow plains of liska to
the summit of the ice crystal pyramids of sastantua is long and gruelling, even
with jet skis and a team of syneca snowhounds, but the view from the top,
a view which takes in the stin glacier fields, the shimmering prism moun-
tains and the far ethereal dancing icelights, is one which first freezes the mind
and then slowly releases it to hitherto unexperienced horizons of beauty, and
trillian, for one, felt that she could do with a bit of having her mind slowly
released to hitherto unexperienced horizons of beauty.
they went into a low orbit.
there lay the silverwhite beauty of allosimanius syneca beneath them.
zaphod stayed in bed with one head stuck under a pillow and the other doing
crosswords till late into the night.
trillian nodded patiently again, counted to a sufficiently high number, and
told herself that the important thing now was just to get zaphod talking.
she prepared, by dint of deactivating all the robot kitchen synthomatics, the
most fabulously delicious meal she could contrive - delicately oiled meals,
scented fruits, fragrant cheeses, fine aldebaran wines.
she carried it through to him and asked if he felt like talking things through.
zark off, said zaphod.
trillian nodded patiently to herself, counted to an even higher number, tossed
the tray lightly aside, walked to the transport room and just teleported herself
the hell out of his life.
she didnt even programme any coordinates, she hadnt the faintest idea where
she was going, she just went - a random row of dots flowing through the uni-
verse.
anything, she said to herself as she left, is better than this.
good job too, muttered zaphod to himself, turned over and failed to go to
sleep.
the next day he restlessly paced the empty corridors of the ship, pretending

59

not to look for her, though he knew she wasnt there. he ignored the com-
puters querulous demands to know just what the hell was going on around
here by fitting a small electronic gag across a pair of its terminals.
after a while he began to turn down the lights. there was nothing to see.
nothing was about to happen.
lying in bed one night - and night was now virtually continuous on the ship -
he decided to pull himself together, to get things into some kind of perspective.
he sat up sharply and started to pull clothes on. he decided that there must
be someone in the universe feeling more wretched, miserable and forsaken than
himself, and he determined to set out and find him.
halfway to the bridge it occurred to him that it might be marvin, and he
returned to bed.
it was a few hours later than this, as he stomped disconsolately about the
darkened corridors swearing at cheerful doors, that he heard the wop said,
and it made him very nervous.
he leant tensely against the corridor wall and frowned like a man trying to
unbend a corkscrew by telekinesis. he laid his fingertips against the wall and
felt an unusual vibration. and now he could quite clearly hear slight noises,
and could hear where they were coming from - they were coming from the
bridge.
computer? he hissed.
mmmm? said the computer terminal nearest him, equally quietly.
is there someone on this ship?
mmmmm, said the computer.
who is it?
mmmmm mmm mmmmm, said the computer.
what?
mmmmm mmmm mm mmmmmmmm.
zaphod buried one of his faces in two of his hands.
oh, zarquon, he muttered to himself. then he stared up the corridor to-
wards the entrance to the bridge in the dim distance from which more and
purposeful noises were coming, and in which the gagged terminals were situ-
ated.
computer, he hissed again.
mmmmm?
when i ungag you ...
mmmmm.
remind me to punch myself in the mouth.
mmmmm mmm?
either one. now just tell me this. one for yes, two for no. is it dangerous?

60

chapter 10.

mmmmm.
it is?
mmmm.
you didnt just go mmmm twice?
mmmm mmmm.
hmmmm.
he inched his way up the corridor as if he would rather be yarding his way
down it, which was true.
he was within two yards of the door to the bridge when he suddenly realized
to his horror that it was going to be nice to him, and he stopped dead. he
hadnt been able to turn off the doors courtesy voice circuits.
this doorway to the bridge was concealed from view within it because of the
excitingly chunky way in which the bridge had been designed to curve round,
and he had been hoping to enter unobserved.
he leant despondently back against the wall again and said some words which
his other head was quite shocked to hear.
he peered at the dim pink outline of the door, and discovered that in the
darkness of the corridor he could just about make out the sensor field which
extended out into the corridor and told the door when there was someone
there for whom it must open and to whom it must make a cheery and pleasant
remark.
he pressed himself hard back against the wall and edged himself towards the
door, flattening his chest as much as he possibly could to avoid brushing
against the very, very dim perimeter of the field. he held his breath, and con-
gratulated himself on having lain in bed sulking for the last few days rather
than trying to work out his feelings on chest expanders in the ships gym.
he then realized he was going to have to speak at this point.
he took a series of very shallow breaths, and then said as quickly and as qui-
etly as he could, door, if you can hear me, say so very, very quietly.
very, very quietly, the door murmured, i can hear you.
good. now, in a moment, im going to ask you to open. when you open i
do not want you to say that you enjoyed it, ok?
ok.
and i dont want you to say to me that i have made a simple door very
happy, or that it is your pleasure to open for me and your satisfaction to close
again with the knowledge of a job well done, ok?
ok.
and i do not want you to ask me to have a nice day, understand?
i understand.
ok, said zaphod, tensing himself, open now.

61

the door slid open quietly. zaphod slipped quietly through. the door closed
quietly behind him.
is that the way you like it, mr beeblebrox? said the door out loud.
i want you to imagine, said zaphod to the group of white robots who swung
round to stare at him at that point, that i have an extremely powerful kill-
o-zap blaster pistol in my hand.
there was an immensely cold and savage silence. the robots regarded him
with hideously dead eyes. they stood very still. there was something in-
tensely macabre about their appearance, especially to zaphod who had never
seen one before or even known anything about them. the krikkit wars be-
longed to the ancient past of the galaxy, and zaphod had spent most of his
early history lessons plotting how he was going to have sex with the girl in
the cybercubicle next to him, and since his teaching computer had been an
integral part of this plot it had eventually had all its history circuits wiped
and replaced with an entirely different set of ideas which had then resulted in
it being scrapped and sent to a home for degenerate cybermats, whither it
was followed by the girl who had inadvertently fallen deeply in love with the
unfortunate machine, with the result (a) that zaphod never got near her and
(b) that he missed out on a period of ancient history that would have been of
inestimable value to him at this moment.
he stared at them in shock.
it was impossible to explain why, but their smooth and sleek white bodies
seemed to be the utter embodiment of clean, clinical evil. from their hideously
dead eyes to their powerful lifeless feet, they were clearly the calculated prod-
uct of a mind that wanted simply to kill. zaphod gulped in cold fear.
they had been dismantling part of the rear bridge wall, and had forced a
passage through some of the vital innards of the ship. through the tangled
wreckage zaphod could see, with a further and worse sense of shock, that they
were tunnelling towards the very heart of the ship, the heart of the improba-
bility drive that had been so mysteriously created out of thin air, the heart
of gold itself.
the robot closest to him was regarding him in such a way as to suggest that it
was measuring every smallest particle of his body, mind and capability. and
when it spoke, what it said seemed to bear this impression out. before going on
to what it actually said, it is worth recording at this point that zaphod was the
first living organic being to hear one of these creatures speak for something
over ten billion years.
if he had paid more attention to his ancient history
lessons and less to his organic being, he might have been more impressed by
this honour.
the robots voice was like its body, cold, sleek and lifeless. it had almost a

62

chapter 10.

cultured rasp to it. it sounded as ancient as it was.
it said, you do have a kill-o-zap blaster pistol in your hand.
zaphod didnt know what it meant for a moment, but then he glanced down
at his own hand and was relieved to see that what he had found clipped to a
wall bracket was indeed what he had thought it was.
yeah, he said in a kind of relieved sneer, which is quite tricky, well, i
wouldnt want to overtax your imagination, robot. for a while nobody said
anything, and zaphod realized that the robots were obviously not here to make
conversation, and that it was up to him.
i cant help noticing that you have parked your ship, he said with a nod of
one of his heads in the appropriate direction, through mine.
there was no denying this. without regard for any kind of proper dimensional
behaviour they had simply materialized their ship precisely where they wanted
it to be, which meant that it was simply locked through the heart of gold as
if they were nothing more than two combs.
again, they made no response to this, and zaphod wondered if the conversa-
tion would gather any momentum if he phrased his part of it in the form of
questions.
... havent you? he added.
yes, replied the robot.
er, ok, said zaphod. so what are you cats doing here?
silence.
robots, said zaphod, what are you robots doing here?
we have come, rasped the robot, for the gold of the bail.
zaphod nodded. he waggled his gun to invite further elaboration. the robot
seemed to understand this.
the gold bail is part of the key we seek, continued the robot, to release
our masters from krikkit.
zaphod nodded again. he waggled his gun again.
the key, continued the robot simply, was disintegrated in time and space.
the golden bail is embedded in the device which drives your ship.
it will
be reconstituted in the key. our masters shall be released. the universal
readjustment will continue.
zaphod nodded again.
what are you talking about? he said.
a slightly pained expression seemed to cross the robots totally expressionless
face. he seemed to be finding the conversation depressing.
obliteration, it said. we seek the key, it repeated, we already have the
wooden pillar, the steel pillar and the perspex pillar. in a moment we will
have the gold bail ...

63

no you wont.
we will, stated the robot.
no you wont. it makes my ship work.
in a moment, repeated the robot patiently, we will have the gold bail ...
you will not, said zaphod.
and then we must go, said the robot, in all seriousness, to a party.
oh, said zaphod, startled. can i come?
no, said the robot. we are going to shoot you.
oh yeah? said zaphod, waggling his gun.
yes, said the robot, and they shot him.
zaphod was so surprised that they had to shoot him again before he fell down.

64

chapter 10.



shhh, said slartibartfast. listen and watch.
night had now fallen on ancient krikkit. the sky was dark and empty. the
only light was coming from the nearby town, from which pleasant convivial
sounds were drifting quietly on the breeze. they stood beneath a tree from
which heady fragrances wafted around them. arthur squatted and felt the
informational illusion of the soil and the grass. he ran it through his fingers.
the soil seemed heavy and rich, the grass strong. it was hard to avoid the
impression that this was a thoroughly delightful place in all respects.
the sky was, however, extremely blank and seemed to arthur to cast a cer-
tain chill over the otherwise idyllic, if currently invisible, landscape. still, he
supposed, its a question of what youre used to.
he felt a tap on his shoulder and looked up. slartibartfast was quietly direct-
ing his attention to something down the other side of the hill. he looked and
could just see some faint lights dancing and waving, and moving slowly in their
direction.
as they came nearer, sounds became audible too, and soon the dim lights and
noises resolved themselves into a small group of people who were walking home
across the hill towards the town.
they walked quite near the watchers beneath the tree, swinging lanterns which
made soft and crazy lights dance among the trees and grass, chattering con-
tentedly, and actually singing a song about how terribly nice everything was,
how happy they were, how much they enjoyed working on the farm, and how
pleasant it was to be going home to see their wives and children, with a lilting
chorus to the effect that the flowers were smelling particularly nice at this
time of year and that it was a pity the dog had died seeing as it liked them so
much. arthur could almost imagine paul mccartney sitting with his feet up
by the fire on evening, humming it to linda and wondering what to buy with
the proceeds, and thinking probably essex.66

chapter 11.

the masters of krikkit, breathed slartibartfast in sepulchral tones.
coming, as it did, so hard upon the heels of his own thoughts about essex this
remark caused arthur a moments confusion. then the logic of the situation
imposed itself on his scattered mind, and he discovered that he still didnt
understand what the old man meant.
what? he said.
the masters of krikkit, said slartibartfast again, and if his breathing had
been sepulchral before, this time he sounded like someone in hades with bron-
chitis.
arthur peered at the group and tried to make sense of what little information
he had at his disposal at this point.
the people in the group were clearly alien, if only because they seemed a lit-
tle tall, thin, angular and almost as pale as to be white, but otherwise they
appeared remarkably pleasant; a little whimsical perhaps, one wouldnt neces-
sarily want to spend a long coach journey with them, but the point was that
if they deviated in any way from being good straightforward people it was in
being perhaps too nice rather than not nice enough. so why all this rasping
lungwork from slartibartfast which would seem more appropriate to a radio
commercial for one of those nasty films about chainsaw operators taking their
work home with them?
then, this krikkit angle was a tough one, too. he hadnt quite fathomed the
connection between what he knew as cricket, and what ...
slartibartfast interrupted his train of thought at this point as if sensing what
was going through his mind.
the game you know as cricket, he said, and his voice still seemed to be
wandering lost in subterranean passages, is just one of those curious freaks of
racial memory which can keep images alive in the mind aeons after their true
significance has been lost in the mists of time. of all the races on the galaxy,
only the english could possibly revive the memory of the most horrific wars
ever to sunder the universe and transform it into what im afraid is generally
regarded as an incomprehensibly dull and pointless game.
rather fond of it myself, he added, but in most peoples eyes you have
been inadvertently guilty of the most grotesque bad taste. particularly the bit
about the little red ball hitting the wicket, thats very nasty.
um, said arthur with a reflective frown to indicate that his cognitive synapses
were coping with this as best as they could, um.
and these, said slartibartfast, slipping back into crypt guttural and indicat-
ing the group of krikkit men who had now walked past them, are the ones
who started it all, and it will start tonight. come, we will follow, and see
why.

67

they slipped out from underneath the tree, and followed the cheery party along
the dark hill path. their natural instinct was to tread quietly and stealthily
in pursuit of their quarry, though, as they were simply walking through a
recorded informational illusion, they could as easily have been wearing eupho-
niums and woad for all the notice their quarry would have taken of them.
arthur noticed that a couple of members of the party were now singing a
different song. it came lilting back to them through the soft night air, and
was a sweet romantic ballad which would have netted mccartney kent and
sussex and enabled him to put in a fair offer for hampshire.
you must surely know, said slartibartfast to ford, what it is that is about
to happen?
me? said ford. no.
did you not learn ancient galactic history when you were a child?
i was in the cybercubicle behind zaphod, said ford, it was very distracting.
which isnt to say that i didnt learn some pretty stunning things.
at this point arthur noticed a curious feature to the song that the party were
singing. the middle eight bridge, which would have had mccartney firmly
consolidated in winchester and gazing intently over the test valley to the rich
pickings of the new forest beyond, had some curious lyrics. the songwriter
was referring to meeting with a girl not under the moon or beneath the
stars but above the grass, which struck arthur a little prosaic. then he
looked up again at the bewildering black sky, and had the distinct feeling that
there was an important point here, if only he could grasp what it was. it gave
him a feeling of being alone in the universe, and he said so.
no, said slartibartfast, with a slight quickening of his step, the people of
krikkit have never thought to themselves we are alone in the universe. they
are surrounded by a huge dust cloud, you see, their single sun with its single
world, and they are right out on the utmost eastern edge of the galaxy. be-
cause of the dust cloud there has never been anything to see in the sky. at
night it is totally blank, during the day there is the sun, but you cant look
directly at that so they dont. they are hardly aware of the sky. its as if they
had a blind spot which extended 180 degrees from horizon to horizon.
you see, the reason why they have never thought we are alone in the uni-
verse is that until tonight they dont know about the universe. until tonight.
he moved on, leaving the words ringing in the air behind him.
imagine, he said, never even thinking we are alone simply because it has
never occurred to you to think that theres any other way to be.
he moved on again.
im afraid this is going to be a little unnerving, he added.
as he spoke, they became aware of a very thin roaring scream high up in the

68

chapter 11.

sightless sky above them. they glanced upwards in alarm, but for a moment
or two could see nothing.
then arthur noticed that the people in the party in front of them had heard
the noise, but that none of them seemed to know what to so with it. they were
glancing around themselves in consternation, left, right, forwards, backwards,
even at the ground. it never occurred to them to look upwards.
the profoundness of the shock and horror they emanated a few moments later
when the burning wreckage of a spaceship came hurtling and screaming out
of the sky and crashed about half a mile from where they were standing was
something that you had to be there to experience.
some speak of the heart of gold in hushed tones, some of the starship bistro-
math.
many speak of the legendary and gigantic starship titanic, a majestic and
luxurious cruise-liner launched from the great shipbuilding asteroid complexes
of artifactovol some hundreds of years ago now, and with good reason.
it was sensationally beautiful, staggeringly huge, and more pleasantly equipped
than any ship in what now remains of history (see note below on the cam-
paign for real time) but it had the misfortune to be built in the very earliest
days of improbability physics, long before this difficult and cussed branch of
knowledge was fully, or at all, understood.
the designers and engineers decided, in their innocence, to build a prototype
improbability field into it, which was meant, supposedly, to ensure that it was
infinitely improbable that anything would ever go wrong with any part of the
ship.
they did not realize that because of the quasi-reciprocal and circular nature
of all improbability calculations, anything that was infinitely improbable was
actually very likely to happen almost immediately.
the starship titanic was a monstrously pretty sight as it lay beached like a
silver arcturan megavoidwhale amongst the laser- lit tracery of its construc-
tion gantries, a brilliant cloud of pins and needles of light against the deep
interstellar blackness; but when launched, it did not even manage to complete
its very first radio message - an sos - before undergoing a sudden and gratu-
itous total existence failure.
however, the same event which saw the disastrous failure of one science in its
infancy also witnessed the apotheosis of another. it was conclusively proven
that more people watched the tri-d coverage of the launch than actually existed
at the time, and this has now been recognized as the greatest achievement ever
in the science of audience research.
another spectacular media event of that time was the supernova which the
star ysllodins underwent a few hours later. ysllodins is the star around which

69

most of the galaxys major insurance underwriters live, or rather lived.
but whilst these spaceships, and other great ones which come to mind, such
as the galactic fleet battleships - the gss daring, the gss audacy and the
gss suicidal insanity - are all spoken of with awe, pride, enthusiasm, affection,
admiration, regret, jealousy, resentment, in fact most of the better known emo-
tions, the one which regularly commands the most actual astonishment was
krikkit one, the first spaceship ever built by the people of krikkit. this is
not because it was a wonderful ship. it wasnt.
it was a crazy piece of near junk. it looked as if it had been knocked up in some-
bodys backyard, and this was in fact precisely where it had been knocked up.
the astonishing thing about the ship was not that it was one well (it wasnt)
but that it was done at all. the period of time which had elapsed between the
moment that the people of krikkit had discovered that there was such a thing
as space and the launching of their first spaceship was almost exactly a year.
ford prefect was extremely grateful, as he strapped himself in, that this was
just another informational illusion, and that he was therefore completely safe.
in real life it wasnt a ship he would have set foot in for all the rice wine in
china. extremely rickety was one phrase which sprang to mind, and please
may i get out? was another.
this is going to fly? said arthur, giving gaunt looks, at the lashed-together
pipework and wiring which festooned the cramped interior of the ship.
slartibartfast assured him that it would, that they were perfectly safe and that
it was all going to be extremely instructive and not a little harrowing.
ford and arthur decided just to relax and be harrowed.
why not, said ford, go mad?
in front of them and, of course, totally unaware of their presence for the very
good reason that they werent actually there, were the three pilots. they had
also constructed the ship. they had been on the hill path that night singing
wholesome heartwarming songs. their brains had been very slightly turned by
the nearby crash of the alien spaceship. they had spent weeks stripping every
tiniest last secret out of the wreckage of that burnt-up spaceship, all the while
singing lilting spaceship- stripping ditties. they had then built their own ship
and this was it. this was their ship, and they were currently singing a little
song about that too, expressing the twin joys of achievement and ownership.
the chorus was a little poignant, and told of their sorrow that their work had
kept them such long hours in the garage, away from the company of their
wives and children, who had missed them terribly but had kept them cheerful
by bringing them continual stories of how nicely the puppy was growing up.
pow, they took off.
they roared into the sky like a ship that knew precisely what it was doing.

70

chapter 11.

no way, said ford a while later after they had recovered from the shock of
acceleration, and were climbing up out of the planets atmosphere, no way,
he repeated, does anyone design and build a ship like this in a year, no matter
how motivated. i dont believe it. prove it to me and i still wont believe it.
he shook his head thoughtfully and gazed out of a tiny port at the nothingness
outside it.
the trip passed uneventfully for a while, and slartibartfast fastwound them
through it.
very quickly, therefore, they arrived at the inner perimeter of the hollow, spher-
ical dust cloud which surrounded their sun and home planet, occupying, as
it were, the next orbit out.
it was more as if there was a gradual change in the texture and consistency
of space. the darkness seemed now to thrum and ripple past them. it was a
very cold darkness, a very blank and heavy darkness, it was the darkness of
the night sky of krikkit.
the coldness and heaviness and blankness of it took a slow grip on arthurs
heart, and he felt acutely aware of the feelings of the krikkit pilots which hung
in the air like a thick static charge. they were now on the very boundary of the
historical knowledge of their race. this was the very limit beyond which none
of them had ever speculated, or even known that there was any speculation to
be done.
the darkness of the cloud buffeted at the ship. inside was the silence of history.
their historic mission was to find out if there was anything or anywhere on
the other side of the sky, from which the wrecked spaceship could have come,
another world maybe, strange and incomprehensible though this thought was
to the enclosed minds of those who had lived beneath the sky of krikkit.
history was gathering itself to deliver another blow.
still the darkness thrummed at them, the blank enclosing darkness. it seemed
closer and closer, thicker and thicker, heavier and heavier. and suddenly it
was gone.
they flew out of the cloud.
they saw the staggering jewels of the night in their infinite dust and their
minds sang with fear.
for a while they flew on, motionless against the starry sweep of the galaxy,
itself motionless against the infinite sweep of the universe. and then they
turned round.
itll have to go, the men of krikkit said as they headed back for home.
on the way back they sang a number of tuneful and reflective songs on the
subjects of peace, justice, morality, culture, sport, family life and the obliter-
ation of all other life forms.

71

72

chapter 11.



so you see, said slartibartfast, slowly stirring his artificially constructed
coffee, and thereby also stirring the whirlpool interfaces between real and un-
real numbers, between the interactive perceptions of mind and universe, and
thus generating the restructured matrices of implicitly enfolded subjectivity
which allowed his ship to reshape the very concept of time and space, how it
is.
yes, said arthur.
yes, said ford.
what do i do, said arthur, with this piece of chicken?
slartibartfast glanced at him gravely.
toy with it, he said, toy with it.
he demonstrated with his own piece.
arthur did so, and felt the slight tingle of a mathematical function thrilling
through the chicken leg as it moved four- dimensionally through what slart-
ibartfast had assured him was five-dimensional space.
overnight, said slartibartfast, the whole population of krikkit was trans-
formed from being charming, delightful, intelligent ...
... if whimsical ... interpolated arthur.
... ordinary people, said slartibartfast, into charming, delightful, intelligent
...
... whimsical ...
... manic xenophobes. the idea of a universe didnt fit into their world
picture, so to speak. they simply couldnt cope with it. and so, charmingly,
delightfully, intelligently, whimsically if you like, they decided to destroy it.
whats the matter now?
i dont like the wine very much, said arthur sniffing it.
well, send it back. its all part of the mathematics of it.
arthur did so. he didnt like the topography of the waiters smile, but hed74

chapter 12.

never liked graphs anyway.
where are we going? said ford.
back to the room of informational illusions, said slartibartfast, rising and
patting his mouth with the mathematical representation of a paper napkin,
for the second half.



the people of krikkit, said his high judgmental supremacy, judiciary pag,
livr (the learned, impartial and very relaxed) chairman of the board of
judges at the krikkit war crimes trial, are, well, you know, theyre just a
bunch of real sweet guys, you know, who just happen to want to kill everybody.
hell, i feel the same way some mornings. shit.
ok, he continued, swinging his feet up on to the bench in front of him and
pausing a moment to pick a thread off his ceremonial beach loafers, so you
wouldnt necessarily want to share a galaxy with these guys.
this was true.
the krikkit attack on the galaxy had been stunning. thousands and thou-
sands of huge krikkit warships had leapt suddenly out of hyperspace and
simultaneously attacked thousands and thousands of major worlds, first seiz-
ing vital material supplies for building the next wave, and then calmly zapping
those worlds out of existence.
the galaxy, which had been enjoying a period of unusual peace and prosperity
at the time, reeled like a man getting mugged in a meadow.
i mean, continued judiciary pag, gazing round the ultra-modern (this was
ten billion years ago, when ultra-modern meant lots of stainless steel and
brushed concrete) and huge courtroom, these guys are just obsessed.
this too was true, and is the only explanation anyone has yet managed to
come up with for the unimaginable speed with which the people of krikkit
had pursued their new and absolute purpose - the destruction of everything
that wasnt krikkit.
it is also the only explanation for their bewildering sudden grasp of all the
hypertechnology involved in building their thousands of spaceships, and their
millions of lethal white robots.
these had really struck terror into the hearts of everyone who had encoun-
tered them - in most cases, however, the terror was extremely short-lived,76

chapter 13.

as was the person experiencing the terror. they were savage, single-minded
flying battle machines. they wielded formidable multifunctional battleclubs
which, brandished one way, would knock down buildings and, brandished an-
other way, fired blistering omni-destructo zap rays and, brandished a third
way, launched a hideous arsenal of grenades, ranging from minor incendiary
devices to maxi-slorta hypernuclear devices which could take out a major
sun. simply striking the grenades with the battleclubs simultaneously primed
them, and launched them with phenomenal accuracy over distances ranging
from mere yards to hundreds of thousands of miles.
ok, said judiciary pag again, so we won. he paused and chewed a little
gum. we won, he repeated, but thats no big deal. i mean a medium-sized
galaxy against one little world, and how long did it take us? clerk of the
court?
mlud? said the severe little man in black, rising.
how long, kiddo?
it is a trifle difficult, mlud, to be precise in this matter. time and distance
...
relax, guy, be vague.
i hardly like to be vague, mlud, over such a ...
bite the bullet and be it.
the clerk of the court blinked at him.
it was clear that like most of the
galactic legal profession he found judiciary pag (or zipo bibrok 5 / 108, as
his private name was known, inexplicably, to be) a rather distressing figure.
he was clearly a bounder and a cad. he seemed to think that the fact that he
was the possessor of the finest legal mind ever discovered gave him the right
to behave exactly as he liked, and unfortunately he appeared to be right.
er, well, mlud, very approximately, two thousand years, the clerk mur-
mured unhappily.
and how many guys zilched out?
two grillion, mlud. the clerk sat down. a hydrospectic photo of him at
this point would have revealed that he was steaming slightly.
judiciary pag gazed once more around the courtroom, wherein were assembled
hundreds of the very highest officials of the entire galactic administration, all
in their ceremonial uniforms or bodies, depending on metabolism and custom.
behind a wall of zap-proof crystal stood a representative group of the people
of krikkit, looking with calm, polite loathing at all the aliens gathered to pass
judgment on them. this was the most momentous occasion in legal history,
and judiciary pag knew it.
he took out his chewing gum and stuck it under his chair.
thats a whole lotta stiffs, he said quietly.

77

the grim silence in the courtroom seemed in accord with this view.
so, like i said, these are a bunch of really sweet guys, but you wouldnt want
to share a galaxy with them, not if theyre just gonna keep at it, not if theyre
not gonna learn to relax a little. i mean its just gonna be continual nervous
time, isnt it, right? pow, pow, pow, when are they next coming at us? peace-
ful coexistence is just right out, right? get me some water somebody, thank
you.
he sat back and sipped reflectively.
ok, he said, hear me, hear me. its, like, these guys, you know, are en-
titled to their own view of the universe. and according to their view, which
the universe forced on them, right, they did right. sounds crazy, but i think
youll agree. they believe in ...
he consulted a piece of paper which he found in the back pocket of his judicial
jeans.
they believe in peace, justice, morality, culture, sport, family life, and the
obliteration of all other life forms.
he shrugged.
ive heard a lot worse, he said.
he scratched his crotch reflectively.
freeeow, he said. he took another sip of water, then held it up to the light
and frowned at it. he twisted it round.
hey, is there something in this water? he said.
er, no, mlud, said the court usher who had brought it to him, rather ner-
vously.
then take it away, snapped judiciary pag, and put something in it. i got
an idea.
he pushed away the glass and leaned forward.
hear me, hear me, he said.
the solution was brilliant, and went like this:
the planet of krikkit was to be enclosed for perpetuity in an envelope of
slo-time, inside which life would continue almost infinitely slowly. all light
would be deflected round the envelope so that it would remain invisible and
impenetrable. escape from the envelope would be utterly impossible unless it
were locked from the outside.
when the rest of the universe came to its final end, when the whole of creation
reached its dying fall (this was all, of course, in the days before it was known
that the end of the universe would be a spectacular catering venture) and
life and matter ceased to exist, then the planet of krikkit and its sun would
emerge from its slo-time envelope and continue a solitary existence, such as
it craved, in the twilight of the universal void.

78

chapter 13.

the lock would be on an asteroid which would slowly orbit the envelope.
the key would be the symbol of the galaxy - the wikkit gate.
by the time the applause in the court had died down, judiciary pag was al-
ready in the sens-o-shower with a rather nice member of the jury that hed
slipped a note to half an hour earlier.



two months later, zipo bibrok 5 / 108 had cut the bottoms off his galactic
state jeans, and was spending part of the enormous fee his judgments com-
manded lying on a jewelled beach having essence of qualactin rubbed into his
back by the same rather nice member of the jury. she was a soolfinian girl
from beyond the cloudworlds of yaga. she had skin like lemon silk and was
very interested in legal bodies.
did you hear the news? she said.
weeeeelaaaaah! said zipo bibrok 5 / 108, and you would have had to have
been there to know exactly why he said this. none of this was on the tape of
informational illusions, and is all based on hearsay.
no, he added, when the thing that had made him say weeeeelaaaaah had
stopped happening. he moved his body round slightly to catch the first rays
of the third and greatest of primeval vods three suns which was now creeping
over the ludicrously beautiful horizon, and the sky now glittered with some of
the greatest tanning power ever known.
a fragrant breeze wandered up from the quiet sea, trailed along the beach,
and drifted back to sea again, wondering where to go next. on a mad impulse
it went up to the beach again. it drifted back to sea.
i hope it isnt good news, muttered zipo bibrok 5 / 108, cos i dont think
i could bear it.
your krikkit judgment was carried out today, said the girl sumptuously.
there was no need to say such a straightforward thing sumptuously, but she
went ahead and did it anyway because it was that sort of day. i heard it on
the radio, she said, when i went back to the ship for the oil.
uhuh, muttered zipo and rested his head back on the jewelled sand.
something happened, she said.
mmmm?
just after the slo-time envelope was locked, she said, and paused a moment80

chapter 14.

from rubbing in the essence of qualactin, a krikkit warship which had been
missing presumed destroyed turned out to be just missing after all. it appeared
and tried to seize the key.
zipo sat up sharply.
hey, what? he said.
its all right, she said in a voice which would have calmed the big bang
down. apparently there was a short battle. the key and the warship were
disintegrated and blasted into the space-time continuum. apparently they are
lost for ever.
she smiled, and ran a little more essence of qualactin on to her fingertips.
he relaxed and lay back down.
do what you did a moment or two ago, he murmured.
that? she said.
no, no, he said, that.
she tried again.
that? she asked.
weeeeelaaaaah!
again, you had to be there.
the fragrant breeze drifted up from the sea again.
a magician wandered along the beach, but no one needed him.



nothing is lost for ever, said slartibartfast, his face flickering redly in the
light of the candle which the robot waiter was trying to take away, except for
the cathedral of chalesm.
the what? said arthur with a start.
the cathedral of chalesm, repeated slartibartfast. it was during the
course of my researches at the campaign for real time that i ...
the what? said arthur again.
the old man paused and gathered his thoughts, for what he hoped would be
one last onslaught on his story. the robot waiter moved through the space-time
matrices in a way which spectacularly combined the surly with the obsequious,
made a snatch for the candle and got it. they had had the bill, had argued
convincingly about who had had the cannelloni and how many bottles of wine
they had had, and, as arthur had been dimly aware, had thereby successfully
manoeuvred the ship out of subjective space and into a parking orbit round
a strange planet. the waiter was now anxious to complete his part of the
charade and clear the bistro.
all will become clear, said slartibartfast.
when?
in a minute. listen. the time streams are now very polluted. theres a lot
of muck floating about in them, flotsam and jetsam, and more and more of
it is now being regurgitated into the physical world. eddies in the space-time
continuum, you see.
so i hear, said arthur.
look, where are we going? said ford, pushing his chair back from the table
with impatience. because im eager to get there.
we are going, said slartibartfast in a slow, measured voice, to try to pre-
vent the war robots of krikkit from regaining the whole of the key they need
to unlock the planet of krikkit from the slo-time envelope and release the82

chapter 15.

rest of their army and their mad masters.
its just, said ford, that you mentioned a party.
i did, said slartibartfast, and hung his head.
he realized that it had been a mistake, because the idea seemed to exercise a
strange and unhealthy fascination on the mind of ford prefect. the more that
slartibartfast unravelled the dark and tragic story of krikkit and its people,
the more ford prefect wanted to drink a lot and dance with girls.
the old man felt that he should not have mentioned the party until he ab-
solutely had to. but there it was, the fact was out, and ford prefect had
attached himself to it the way an arcturan megaleach attaches itself to its
victim before biting his head off and making off with his spaceship.
when, said ford eagerly, do we get there?
when ive finished telling you why we have to go there.
i know why im going, said ford, and leaned back, sticking his hands behind
his head. he gave one of his smiles which made people twitch.
slartibartfast had hoped for an easy retirement.
he had been planning to learn to play the octraventral heebiephone - a pleas-
antly futile task, he knew, because he had the wrong number of mouths.
he had also been planning to write an eccentric and relentlessly inaccurate
monograph on the subject of equatorial fjords in order to set the record wrong
about one or two matters he saw as important.
instead, he had somehow got talked into doing some part-time work for the
campaign for real time and had started to take it all seriously for the first
time in his life. as a result he now found himself spending his fast-declining
years combating evil and trying to save the galaxy.
he found it exhausting work and sighed heavily.
listen, he said, at camtim ...
what? said arthur.
the campaign for real time, which i will tell you about later. i noticed that
five pieces of jetsam which had in relatively recent times plopped back into
existence seemed to correspond to the five pieces of the missing key. only
two i could trace exactly - the wooden pillar, which appeared on your planet,
and the silver bail. it seems to be at some sort of party. we must go there to
retrieve it before the krikkit robots find it, or who knows what may hap?
no, said ford firmly. we must go to the party in order to drink a lot and
dance with girls.
but havent you understood everything i ...?
yes, said ford, with a sudden and unexpected fierceness, ive understood
it all perfectly well. thats why i want to have as many drinks and dance with
as many girls as possible while there are still any left. if everything youve

83

shown us is true ...
true? of course its true.
... then we dont stand a whelks chance in a supernova.
a what? said arthur sharply again. he had been following the conversation
doggedly up to this point, and was keen not to lose the thread now.
a whelks chance in a supernova, repeated ford without losing momentum.
the ...
whats a whelk got to do with a supernova? said arthur.
it doesnt, said ford levelly, stand a chance in one.
he paused to see if the matter was now cleared up. the freshly puzzled looks
clambering across arthurs face told him that it wasnt.
a supernova, said ford as quickly and as clearly as he could, is a star which
explodes at almost half the speed of light and burns with the brightness of a
billion suns and then collapses as a super-heavy neutron star. its a star which
burns up other stars, got it? nothing stands a chance in a supernova.
i see, said arthur.
the ...
so why a whelk particularly?
why not a whelk? doesnt matter.
arthur accepted this, and ford continued, picking up his early fierce momen-
tum as best he could.
the point is, he said, that people like you and me, slartibartfast, and
arthur - particularly and especially arthur - are just dilletantes, eccentrics,
layabouts, fartarounds if you like.
slartibartfast frowned, partly in puzzlement and partly in umbrage. he started
to speak.
- ... is as far as he got.
were not obsessed by anything, you see, insisted ford.
...
and thats the deciding factor. we cant win against obsession. they care,
we dont. they win.
i care about lots of things, said slartibartfast, his voice trembling partly
with annoyance, but partly also with uncertainty.
such as?
well, said the old man, life, the universe. everything, really. fjords.
would you die for them?
fjords? blinked slartibartfast in surprise. no.
well then.
wouldnt see the point, to be honest.
and i still cant see the connection, said arthur, with whelks.

84

chapter 15.

ford could feel the conversation slipping out of his control, and refused to be
sidetracked by anything at this point.
the point is, he hissed, that we are not obsessive people, and we dont
stand a chance against ...
except for your sudden obsession with whelks, pursued arthur, which i
still havent understood.
will you please leave whelks out of it?
i will if you will, said arthur. you brought the subject up.
it was an error, said ford, forget them. the point is this.
he leant forward and rested his forehead on the tips of his fingers.
what was i talking about? he said wearily.
lets just go down to the party, said slartibartfast, for whatever reason.
he stood up, shaking his head.
i think thats what i was trying to say, said ford.
for some unexplained reason, the teleport cubicles were in the bathroom.



time travel is increasingly regarded as a menace. history is being polluted.
the encyclopedia galactica has much to say on the theory and practice of
time travel, most of which is incomprehensible to anyone who hasnt spent at
least four lifetimes studying advanced hypermathematics, and since it was im-
possible to do this before time travel was invented, there is a certain amount of
confusion as to how the idea was arrived at in the first place. one rationaliza-
tion of this problem states that time travel was, by its very nature, discovered
simultaneously at all periods of history, but this is clearly bunk.
the trouble is that a lot of history is now quite clearly bunk as well.
here is an example. it may not seem to be an important one to some people,
but to others it is crucial. it is certainly significant in that it was the single
event which caused the campaign for real time to be set up in the first place
(or is it last? it depends which way round you see history as happening, and
this too is now an increasingly vexed question).
there is, or was, a poet. his name was lallafa, and he wrote what are widely
regarded throughout the galaxy as being the finest poems in existence, the
songs of the long land.
they are/were unspeakably wonderful. that is to say, you couldnt speak very
much of them at once without being so overcome with emotion, truth and a
sense of wholeness and oneness of things that you wouldnt pretty soon need
a brisk walk round the block, possibly pausing at a bar on the way back for a
quick glass of perspective and soda. they were that good.
lallafa had lived in the forests of the long lands of effa. he lived there, and
he wrote his poems there. he wrote them on pages made of dried habra leaves,
without the benefit of education or correcting fluid. he wrote about the light
in the forest and what he thought about that. he wrote about the darkness
in the forest, and what he thought about that. he wrote about the girl who
had left him and precisely what he thought about that.86

chapter 16.

long after his death his poems were found and wondered over. news of them
spread like morning sunlight. for centuries they illuminated and watered the
lives of many people whose lives might otherwise have been darker and drier.
then, shortly after the invention of time travel, some major correcting fluid
manufacturers wondered whether his poems might have been better still if he
had had access to some high-quality correcting fluid, and whether he might
be persuaded to say a few words on that effect.
they travelled the time waves, they found him, they explained the situation
- with some difficulty - to him, and did indeed persuade him. in fact they
persuaded him to such an effect that he became extremely rich at their hands,
and the girl about whom he was otherwise destined to write which such preci-
sion never got around to leaving him, and in fact they moved out of the forest
to a rather nice pad in town and he frequently commuted to the future to do
chat shows, on which he sparkled wittily.
he never got around to writing the poems, of course, which was a problem,
but an easily solved one. the manufacturers of correcting fluid simply packed
him off for a week somewhere with a copy of a later edition of his book and a
stack of dried habra leaves to copy them out on to, making the odd deliberate
mistake and correction on the way.
many people now say that the poems are suddenly worthless. others argue
that they are exactly the same as they always were, so whats changed? the
first people say that that isnt the point. they arent quite sure what the
point is, but they are quite sure that that isnt it. they set up the campaign
for real time to try to stop this sort of thing going on. their case was con-
siderably strengthened by the fact that a week after they had set themselves
up, news broke that not only had the great cathedral of chalesm been pulled
down in order to build a new ion refinery, but that the construction of the
refinery had taken so long, and had had to extend so far back into the past in
order to allow ion production to start on time, that the cathedral of chalesm
had now never been built in the first place. picture postcards of the cathedral
suddenly became immensely valuable.
so a lot of history is now gone for ever. the campaign for real timers claim
that just as easy travel eroded the differences between one country and an-
other, and between one world and another, so time travel is now eroding the
differences between one age and another. the past, they say, is now truly
like a foreign country. they do things exactly the same there.



arthur materialized, and did so with all the customary staggering about and
clasping at his throat, heart and various limbs which he still indulged himself
in whenever he made any of these hateful and painful materializations that he
was determined not to let himself get used to.
he looked around for the others.
they werent there.
he looked around for the others again.
they still werent there.
he closed his eyes.
he opened them
he looked around for the others.
they obstinately persisted in their absence.
he closed his eyes again, preparatory to making this completely futile exercise
once more, and because it was only then, whilst his eyes were closed, that his
brain began to register what his eyes had been looking at whilst they were
open, a puzzled frown crept across his face.
so he opened his eyes again to check his facts and the frown stayed put.
if anything, it intensified, and got a good firm grip. if this was a party it was
a very bad one, so bad, in fact, that everybody else had left. he abandoned
this line of thought as futile. obviously this wasnt a party. it was a cave, or
a labyrinth, or a tunnel of something - there was insufficient light to tell. all
was darkness, a damp shiny darkness. the only sounds were the echoes of his
own breathing, which sounded worried. he coughed very slightly, and then had
to listen to the thin ghostly echo of his cough trailing away amongst winding
corridors and sightless chambers, as of some great labyrinth, and eventually
returning to him via the same unseen corridors, as if to say ... yes?
this happened to every slightest noise he made, and it unnerved him. he tried
to hum a cheery tune, but by the time it returned to him it was a hollow dirge88

chapter 17.

and he stopped.
his mind was suddenly full of images from the story that slartibartfast had
been telling him. he half-expected suddenly to see lethal white robots step
silently from the shadows and kill him. he caught his breath. they didnt.
he let it go again. he didnt know what he did expect.
someone or something, however, seemed to be expecting him, for at that mo-
ment there lit up suddenly in the dark distance an eerie green neon sign.
it said, silently:
you have been diverted
the sign flicked off again, in a way which arthur was not at all certain he
liked. it flicked off with a sort of contemptuous flourish. arthur then tried
to assure himself that this was just a ridiculous trick of his imagination. a
neon sign is either on or off, depending on whether it has electricity running
through it or not. there was no way, he told himself, that it could possibly
effect the transition from one state to the other with a contemptuous flourish.
he hugged himself tightly in his dressing gown and shivered, nevertheless.
the neon sign in the depths now suddenly lit up, bafflingly, with just three
dots and a comma. like this:
only in green neon.
it was trying, arthur realized after staring at this perplexedly for a second
or two, to indicate that there was more to come, that the sentence was not
complete. trying with almost superhuman pedantry, he reflected. or at least,
inhuman pedantry.
the sentence then completed itself with these two words:
arthur dent.
he reeled. he steadied himself to have another clear look at it. it still said
arthur dent, so he reeled again.
once again, the sign flicked off, and left him blinking in the darkness with
just the dim red image of his name jumping on his retina.
welcome, the sign now suddenly said.
after a moment, it added:
i dont think.
the stone-cold fear which had been hovering about arthur all this time, wait-
ing for its moment, recognized that its moment had now come and pounced
on him. he tried to fight it off. he dropped into a kind of alert crouch that
he had once seen somebody do on television, but it must have been someone
with stronger knees. he peered huntedly into the darkness.
er, hello? he said.
he cleared his throat and said it again, more loudly and without the er. at
some distance down the corridor it seemed suddenly as if somebody started to

89

beat on a bass drum.
he listened to it for a few seconds and realized that it was just his heart beat-
ing.
he listened for a few seconds more and realized that it wasnt his heart beat-
ing, it was somebody down the corridor beating on a bass drum.
beads of sweat formed on his brow, tensed themselves, and leapt off. he put
a hand out on the floor to steady his alert crouch, which wasnt holding up
very well. the sign changed itself again. it said:
do not be alarmed.
after a pause, it added:
be very very frightened, arthur dent.
once again it flicked off. once again it left him in darkness. his eyes seemed
to be popping out of his head. he wasnt certain if this was because they were
trying to see more clearly, or if they simply wanted to leave at this point.
hello? he said again, this time trying to put a note of rugged and aggressive
self-assertion into it. is anyone there?
there was no reply, nothing.
this unnerved arthur dent even more than a reply would have done, and he
began to back away from the scary nothingness. and the more he backed away,
the more scared he became. after a while he realized that the reason for this
was because of all the films he had seen in which the hero backs further and
further away from some imagined terror in front of him, only to bump into it
coming up from behind.
just then it suddenly occurred to him to turn round rather quickly.
there was nothing there.
just blackness.
this really unnerved him, and he started to back away from that, back the
way he had come.
after doing this for a short while it suddenly occurred to him that he was now
backing towards whatever it was he had been backing away from in the first
place.
this, he couldnt help thinking, must be a foolish thing to do. he decided he
would be better off backing the way he had first been backing, and turned
around again.
it turned out at this point that his second impulse had been the correct one,
because there was an indescribably hideous monster standing quietly behind
him. arthur yawed wildly as his skin tried to jump one way and his skeleton
the other, whilst his brain tried to work out which of his ears it most wanted
to crawl out of.
bet you werent expecting to see me again, said the monster, which arthur

90

chapter 17.

couldnt help thinking was a strange remark for it to make, seeing as he had
never met the creature before. he could tell that he hadnt met the creature
before from the simple fact that he was able to sleep at nights. it was ...
it
was ... it was ...
arthur blinked at it. it stood very still. it did look a little familiar.
a terrible cold calm came over him as he realized that what he was looking at
was a six-foot-high hologram of a housefly.
he wondered why anybody would be showing him a six-foot-high hologram of
a housefly at this time. he wondered whose voice he had heard.
it was a terribly realistic hologram.
it vanished.
or perhaps you remember me better, said the voice suddenly, and it was a
deep, hollow malevolent voice which sounded like molten tar glurping out of a
drum with evil on its mind, as the rabbit.
with a sudden ping, there was a rabbit there in the black labyrinth with him,
a huge, monstrously, hideously soft and lovable rabbit - an image again, but
one on which every single soft and lovable hair seemed like a real and single
thing growing in its soft and lovable coat. arthur was startled to see his own
reflection in its soft and lovable unblinking and extremely huge brown eyes.
born in darkness, rumbled the voice, raised in darkness. one morning i
poked my head for the first time into the bright new world and got it split
open by what felt suspiciously like some primitive instrument made of flint.
made by you, arthur dent, and wielded by you. rather hard as i recall.
you turned my skin into a bag for keeping interesting stones in. i happen to
know that because in my next life i came back as a fly again and you swatted
me. again. only this time you swatted me with the bag youd made of my
previous skin.
arthur dent, you are not merely a cruel and heartless man, you are also
staggeringly tactless.
the voice paused whilst arthur gawped.
i see you have lost the bag, said the voice. probably got bored with it, did
you?
arthur shook his head helplessly. he wanted to explain that he had been in
fact very fond of the bag and had looked after it very well and had taken it with
him wherever he went, but that somehow every time he travelled anywhere he
seemed inexplicably to end up with the wrong bag and that, curiously enough,
even as they stood there he was just noticing for the first time that the bag
he had with him at the moment appeared to be made out of rather nasty fake
leopard skin, and wasnt the one hed had a few moments ago before he arrived
in this whatever place it was, and wasnt one he would have chosen himself

91

and heaven knew what would be in it as it wasnt his, and he would much
rather have his original bag back, except that he was of course terribly sorry
for having so peremptorily removed it, or rather its component parts, i.e. the
rabbit skin, from its previous owner, viz. the rabbit whom he currently had
the honour of attempting vainly to address.
all he actually managed to say was erp.
meet the newt you trod on, said the voice.
and there was, standing in the corridor with arthur, a giant green scaly newt.
arthur turned, yelped, leapt backwards, and found himself standing in the
middle of the rabbit. he yelped again, but could find nowhere to leap to.
that was me, too, continued the voice in a low menacing rumble, as if you
didnt know ...
know? said arthur with a start. know?
the interesting thing about reincarnation, rasped the voice, is that most
people, most spirits, are not aware that it is happening to them.
he paused for effect. as far as arthur was concerned there was already quite
enough effect going on.
i was aware, hissed the voice, that is, i became aware. slowly. gradually.
he, whoever he was, paused again and gathered breath.
i could hardly help it, could i? he bellowed, when the same thing kept
happening, over and over and over again! every life i ever lived, i got killed by
arthur dent. any world, any body, any time, im just getting settled down,
along comes arthur dent - pow, he kills me.
hard not to notice. bit of a memory jogger. bit of a pointer. bit of a bloody
giveaway!
thats funny, my spirit would say to itself as it winged its way back to the
netherworld after another fruitless dent-ended venture into the land of the
living, that man who just ran over me as i was hopping across the road to
my favourite pond looked a little familiar ... and gradually i got to piece it
together, dent, you multiple-me-murderer!
the echoes of his voice roared up and down the corridors. arthur stood silent
and cold, his head shaking with disbelief.
heres the moment, dent, shrieked the voice, now reaching a feverish pitch
of hatred, heres the moment when at last i knew!
it was indescribably hideous, the thing that suddenly opened up in front of
arthur, making him gasp and gargle with horror, but heres an attempt at a
description of how hideous it was. it was a huge palpitating wet cave with a
vast, slimy, rough, whale-like creature rolling around it and sliding over mon-
strous white tombstones. high above the cave rose a vast promontory in which
could be seen the dark recesses of two further fearful caves, which ...

92

chapter 17.

arthur dent suddenly realized that he was looking at his own mouth, when
his attention was meant to be directed at the live oyster that was being tipped
helplessly into it.
he staggered back with a cry and averted his eyes.
when he looked again the appalling apparition had gone. the corridor was
dark and, briefly, silent. he was alone with his thoughts. they were extremely
unpleasant thoughts and would rather have had a chaperone.
the next noise, when it came, was the low heavy roll of a large section of
wall trundling aside, revealing, for the moment, just dark blackness behind it.
arthur looked into it in much the same way that a mouse looks into a dark
dog-kennel.
and the voice spoke to him again.
tell me it was a coincidence, dent, it said. i dare you to tell me it was a
coincidence!
it was a coincidence, said arthur quickly.
it was not! came the answering bellow.
it was, said arthur, it was ...
if it was a coincidence, then my name, roared the voice, is not agrajag!!!
and presumably, said arthur, you would claim that that was your name.
yes! hissed agrajag, as if he had just completed a rather deft syllogism.
well, im afraid it was still a coincidence, said arthur.
come in here and say that! howled the voice, in sudden apoplexy again.
arthur walked in and said that it was a coincidence, or at least, he nearly said
that it was a coincidence. his tongue rather lost its footing towards the end
of the last word because the lights came up and revealed what it was he had
walked into.
it was a cathedral of hate.
it was the product of a mind that was not merely twisted, but actually
sprained.
it was huge. it was horrific.
it had a statue in it.
we will come to the statue in a moment.
the vast, incomprehensibly vast chamber looked as if it had been carved out
of the inside of a mountain, and the reason for this was that that was precisely
what it had been carved out of. it seemed to arthur to spin sickeningly round
his head as he stood and gaped at it.
it was black.
where it wasnt black you were inclined to wish that it was, because the colours
with which some of the unspeakable details were picked out ranged horribly
across the whole spectrum of eye-defying colours from ultra violent to infra

93

dead, taking in liver purple, loathsome lilac, matter yellow, burnt hombre
and gan green on the way.
the unspeakable details which these colours picked out were gargoyles which
would have put francis bacon off his lunch.
the gargoyles all looked inwards from the walls, from the pillars, from the
flying buttresses, from the choir stalls, towards the statue, to which we will
come in a moment.
and if the gargoyles would have put francis bacon off his lunch, then it was
clear from the gargoyles faces that the statue would have put them off theirs,
had they been alive to eat it, which they werent, and had anybody tried to
serve them some, which they wouldnt.
around the monumental walls were vast engraved stone tablets in memory of
those who had fallen to arthur dent.
the names of some of those commemorated were underlined and had asterisks
against them. so, for instance, the name of a cow which had been slaugh-
tered and of which arthur dent had happened to eat a fillet steak would have
the plainest engraving, whereas the name of a fish which arthur had himself
caught and then decided he didnt like and left on the side of the plate had
a double underlining, three sets of asterisks and a bleeding dagger added as
decoration, just to make the point.
and what was most disturbing about all this, apart from the statue, to which
we are, by degrees, coming, was the very clear implication that all these people
and creatures were indeed the same person, over and over again.
and it was equally clear that this person was, however unfairly, extremely
upset and annoyed.
in fact it would be fair to say that he had reached a level of annoyance the
like of which had never been seen in the universe. it was an annoyance of epic
proportions, a burning searing flame of annoyance, an annoyance which now
spanned the whole of time and space in its infinite umbrage.
and this annoyance had been given its fullest expression in the statue in the
centre of all this monstrosity, which was a statue of arthur dent, and an
unflattering one. fifty feet tall if it was an inch, there was not an inch of
it which wasnt crammed with insult to its subject matter, and fifty feet of
that sort of thing would be enough to make any subject feel bad. from the
small pimple on the side of his nose to the poorish cut of his dressing gown,
there was no aspect of arthur dent which wasnt lambasted and vilified by
the sculptor.
arthur appeared as a gorgon, an evil, rapacious, ravenning, bloodied ogre,
slaughtering his way through an innocent one-man universe.
with each of the thirty arms which the sculptor in a fit of artistic fervour had

94

chapter 17.

decided to give him, he was either braining a rabbit, swatting a fly, pulling a
wishbone, picking a flea out of his hair, or doing something which arthur at
first looking couldnt quite identify.
his many feet were mostly stamping on ants.
arthur put his hands over his eyes, hung his head and shook it slowly from
side to side in sadness and horror at the craziness of things.
and when he opened his eyes again, there in front of him stood the figure of
the man or creature, or whatever it was, that he had supposedly been perse-
cuting all this time.
hhhhhhrrrrrraaaaaahhhhhh! said agrajag.
he, or it, or whatever, looked like a mad fat bat. he waddled slowly around
arthur, and poked at him with bent claws.
look ...! protested arthur.
hhhhhhrrrrrraaaaaahhhhhh!!! explained agrajag, and arthur reluctantly
accepted this on the grounds that he was rather frightened by this hideous and
strangely wrecked apparition.
agrajag was black, bloated, wrinkled and leathery.
his batwings were somehow more frightening for being the pathetic broken
floundering things they were that if they had been strong, muscular beaters
of the air. the frightening thing was probably the tenacity of his continued
existence against all the physical odds.
he had the most astounding collection of teeth.
they looked as if they each came from a completely different animal, and they
were ranged around his mouth at such bizarre angles it seemed that if he ever
actually tried to chew anything hed lacerate half his own face along with it,
and possibly put an eye out as well.
each of his three eyes was small and intense and looked about as sane as a
fish in a privet bush.
i was at a cricket match, he rasped.
this seemed on the face of it such a preposterous notion that arthur practi-
cally choked.
not in this body, screeched the creature, not in this body! this is my last
body. my last life. this is my revenge body. my kill-arthur-dent body. my
last chance. i had to fight to get it, too.
but ...
i was at, roared agrajag, a cricket match! i had a weak heart condition,
but what, i said to my wife, can happen to me at a cricket match? as im
watching, what happens?
two people quite maliciously appear out of thin air just in front of me. the
last thing i cant help but notice before my poor heart gives out in shock is

95

that one of them is arthur dent wearing a rabbit bone in his beard. coinci-
dence?
yes, said arthur.
coincidence? screamed the creature, painfully thrashing its broken wings,
and opening a short gash on its right cheek with a particularly nasty tooth.
on closer examination, such as hed been hoping to avoid, arthur noticed that
much of agrajags face was covered with ragged strips of black sticky plasters.
he backed away nervously. he tugged at his beard. he was appalled to dis-
cover that in fact he still had the rabbit bone in it. he pulled it out and threw
it away.
look, he said, its just fate playing silly buggers with you. with me. with
us. its a complete coincidence.
what have you got against me, dent? snarled the creature, advancing on
him in a painful waddle.
nothing, insisted arthur, honestly, nothing.
agrajag fixed him with a beady stare.
seems a strange way to relate to somebody youve got nothing against, killing
them all the time. very curious piece of social interaction, i would call that.
id also call it a lie!
but look, said arthur, im very sorry. theres been a terrible misunder-
standing. ive got to go. have you got a clock? im meant to be helping save
the universe. he backed away still further.
agrajag advanced still further.
at one point, he hissed, at one point, i decided to give up. yes, i would
not come back. i would stay in the netherworld. and what happened?
arthur indicated with random shakes of his head that he had no idea and
didnt want to have one either. he found he had backed up against the cold
dark stone that had been carved by who knew what herculean effort into a
monstrous travesty of his bedroom slippers. he glanced up at his own horren-
dously parodied image towering above him. he was still puzzled as to what
one of his hands was meant to be doing.
i got yanked involuntarily back into the physical world, pursued agrajag,
as a bunch of petunias. in, i might add, a bowl. this particularly happy
little lifetime started off with me, in my bowl, unsupported, three hundred
miles above the surface of a particularly grim planet. not a naturally tenable
position for a bowl of petunias, you might think. and youd be right. that
life ended a very short while later, three hundred miles lower. in, i might add,
the fresh wreckage of a whale. my spirit brother.
he leered at arthur with renewed hatred.
on the way down, he snarled, i couldnt help noticing a flashy-looking

96

chapter 17.

white spaceship. and looking out of a port on this flashy-looking spaceship
was a smug-looking arthur dent. coincidence?!!
yes! yelped arthur. he glanced up again, and realized that the arm that
had puzzled him was represented as wantonly calling into existence a bowl of
doomed petunias. this was not a concept which leapt easily to the eye.
i must go, insisted arthur.
you may go, said agrajag, after i have killed you.
no, that wont be any use, explained arthur, beginning to climb up the hard
stone incline of his carved slipper, because i have to save the universe, you
see. i have to find a silver bail, thats the point. tricky thing to do dead.
save the universe! spat agrajag with contempt. you should have thought
of that before you started your vendetta against me! what about the time
you were on stavromula beta and someone ...
ive never been there, said arthur.
... tried to assassinate you and you ducked. who do you think the bullet hit?
what did you say?
never been there, repeated arthur. what are you talking about? i have
to go.
agrajag stopped in his tracks.
you must have been there. you were responsible for my death there, as ev-
erywhere else. an innocent bystander! he quivered.
ive never heard of the place, insisted arthur. ive certainly never had any-
one try to assassinate me. other than you. perhaps i go there later, do you
think?
agrajag blinked slowly in a kind of frozen logical horror.
you havent been to stavromula beta ... yet? he whispered.
no, said arthur, i dont know anything about the place. certainly never
been to it, and dont have any plans to go.
oh, you go there all right, muttered agrajag in a broken voice, you go
there all right. oh zark! he tottered, and stared wildly about him at his huge
cathedral of hate. ive brought you here too soon!
he started to scream and bellow. ive brought you here too zarking soon!
suddenly he rallied, and turned a baleful, hating eye on arthur.
im going to kill you anyway! he roared. even if its a logical impossibility
im going to zarking well try! im going to blow this whole mountain up! he
screamed, lets see you get out of this one, dent!
he rushed in a painful waddling hobble to what appeared to be a small black
sacrificial altar. he was shouting so wildly now that he was really carving his
face up badly. arthur leaped down from his vantage place on the carving of
his own foot and ran to try to restrain the three-quarters-crazed creature.

97

he leaped upon him, and brought the strange monstrosity crashing down on
top of the altar.
agrajag screamed again, thrashed wildly for a brief moment, and turned a
wild eye on arthur.
you know what youve done? he gurgled painfully. youve only gone and
killed me again. i mean, what do you want from me, blood?
he thrashed again in a brief apoplectic fit, quivered, and collapsed, smacking
a large red button on the altar as he did so.
arthur started with horror and fear, first at what he appeared to have done,
and then at the loud sirens and bells that suddenly shattered the air to an-
nounce some clamouring emergency. he stared wildly around him.
the only exit appeared to be the way he came in. he pelted towards it, throw-
ing away the nasty fake leopard-skin bag as he did so.
he dashed randomly, haphazardly through the labyrinthine maze, he seemed
to be pursued more and more fiercely by claxons, sirens, flashing lights.
suddenly, he turned a corner and there was a light in front of him.
it wasnt flashing. it was daylight.

98

chapter 17.



although it has been said that on earth alone in our galaxy is krikkit (or
cricket) treated as fit subject for a game, and that for this reason the earth
has been shunned, this does only apply to our galaxy, and more specifically
to our dimension. in some of the higher dimensions they feel they can more
or less please themselves, and have been playing a peculiar game called brock-
ian ultra-cricket for whatever their transdimensional equivalent of billions of
years is.
lets be blunt, its a nasty game (says the hitch hikers guide to the
galaxy) but then anyone who has been to any of the higher dimensions will
know that theyre a pretty nasty heathen lot up there who should just be
smashed and done in, and would be, too, if anyone could work out a way of
firing missiles at right-angles to reality.
this is another example of the fact that the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy
will employ anybody who wants to walk straight in off the street and get ripped
off, especially if they happen to walk in off the street during the afternoon,
when very few of the regular staff are there.
there is a fundamental point here.
the history of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy is one of idealism, strug-
gle, despair, passion, success, failure, and enormously long lunch-breaks.
the earliest origins of the guide are now, along with most of its financial
records, lost in the mists of time.
for other, and more curious theories about where they are lost, see below.
most of the surviving stories, however, speak of a founding editor called hurl-
ing frootmig.
hurling frootmig, it is said, founded the guide, established its fundamental
principles of honesty and idealism, and went bust.
there followed many years of penury and heart-searching during which he con-
sulted friends, sat in darkened rooms in illegal states of mind, thought about100

chapter 18.

this and that, fooled about with weights, and then, after a chance encounter
with the holy lunching friars of voondon (who claimed that just as lunch
was at the centre of a mans temporal day, and mans temporal day could be
seen as an analogy for his spiritual life, so lunch should
(a) be seen as the centre of a mans spiritual life, and
(b) be held in jolly nice restaurants), he refounded the guide, laid down its
fundamental principles of honesty and idealism and where you could stuff them
both, and led the guide on to its first major commercial success.
he also started to develop and explore the role of the editorial lunch-break
which was subsequently to play such a crucial part in the guides history,
since it meant that most of the actual work got done by any passing stranger
who happened to wander into the empty offices on an afternoon and saw some-
thing worth doing.
shortly after this, the guide was taken over by megadodo publications of ursa
minor beta, thus putting the whole thing on a very sound financial footing,
and allowing the fourth editor, lig lury jr, to embark on lunch-breaks of such
breathtaking scope that even the efforts of recent editors, who have started
undertaking sponsored lunch-breaks for charity, seem like mere sandwiches in
comparison.
in fact, lig never formally resigned his editorship - he merely left his office
late one morning and has never since returned. though well over a century has
now passed, many members of the guide staff still retain the romantic notion
that he has simply popped out for a ham croissant, and will yet return to put
in a solid afternoons work.
strictly speaking, all editors since lig lury jr have therefore been designated
acting editors, and ligs desk is still preserved the way he left it, with the
addition of a small sign which says lig lury jr, editor, missing, presumed
fed.
some very scurrilous and subversive sources hint at the idea that lig actually
perished in the guides first extraordinary experiments in alternative book-
keeping. very little is known of this, and less still said. anyone who even
notices, let alone calls attention to, the curious but utter coincidental and
meaningless fact that every world on which the guide has ever set up an
accounting department has shortly afterwards perished in warfare or some
natural disaster, is liable to get sued to smithereens.
it is an interesting though utterly unrelated fact that the two or three days
prior to the demolition of the planet earth to make way for a new hyperspace
bypass saw a dramatic upsurge in the number of ufo sightings there, not
only above lords cricket ground in st. johns wood, london, but also above
glastonbury in somerset.

101

glastonbury had long been associated with myths of ancient kings, witchcraft,
ley-lines an wart curing, and had now been selected as the site for the new
hitch hikers guide financial records office, and indeed, ten years worth of
financial records were transferred to a magic hill just outside the city mere
hours before the vogons arrived.
none of these facts, however strange or inexplicable, is as strange or inexplica-
ble as the rules of the game of brockian ultra-cricket, as played in the higher
dimensions. a full set of rules is so massively complicated that the only time
they were all bound together in a single volume, they underwent gravitational
collapse and became a black hole.
a brief summary, however, is as follows:
rule one: grow at least three extra legs. you wont need them, but it keeps
the crowds amused.
rule two: find one good brockian ultra-cricket player. clone him off a few
times. this saves an enormous amount of tedious selection and training.
rule three: put your team and the opposing team in a large field and build
a high wall round them.
the reason for this is that, though the game is a major spectator sport, the
frustration experienced by the audience at not actually being able to see whats
going on leads them to imagine that its a lot more exciting than it really is. a
crowd that has just watched a rather humdrum game experiences far less life-
affirmation than a crowd that believes it has just missed the most dramatic
event in sporting history.
rule four: throw lots of assorted items of sporting equipment over the wall
for the players. anything will do - cricket bats, basecube bats, tennis guns,
skis, anything you can get a good swing with.
rule five: the players should now lay about themselves for all they are worth
with whatever they find to hand. whenever a player scores a hit on another
player, he should immediately run away and apologize from a safe distance.
apologies should be concise, sincere and, for maximum clarity and points, de-
livered through a megaphone.
rule six: the winning team shall be the first team that wins.
curiously enough, the more the obsession with the game grows in the higher
dimensions, the less it is actually played, since most of the competing teams
are now in a state of permanent warfare with each other over the interpreta-
tion of these rules. this is all for the best, because in the long run a good
solid war is less psychologically damaging than a protracted game of brockian
ultra-cricket.

102

chapter 18.



as arthur ran darting, dashing and panting down the side of the mountain he
suddenly felt the whole bulk of the mountain move very, very slightly beneath
him. there was a rumble, a roar, and a slight blurred movement, and a lick
of heat in the distance behind and above him. he ran in a frenzy of fear. the
land began to slide, and he suddenly felt the force of the word landslide in
a way which had never been apparent to him before. it had always just been
a word to him, but now he was suddenly and horribly aware that sliding is
a strange and sickening thing for land to do. it was doing it with him on it.
he felt ill with fear and shaking. the ground slid, the mountain slurred, he
slipped, he fell, he stood, he slipped again and ran. the avalance began.
stones, then rocks, then boulders which pranced past him like clumsy puppies,
only much, much bigger, much, much harder and heavier, and almost infinitely
more likely to kill you if they fell on you. his eyes danced with them, his feet
danced with the dancing ground. he ran as if running was a terrible sweating
sickness, his heart pounded to the rhythm of the pounding geological frenzy
around him.
the logic of the situation, i.e. that he was clearly bound to survive if the next
foreshadowed incident in the saga of his inadvertent persecution of agrajag
was to happen, was utterly failing to impinge itself on his mind or exercise
any restraining influence on him at this time. he ran with the fear of death
in him, under him, over him and grabbing hold of his hair.
and suddenly he tripped again and was hurled forward by his considerable
momentum. but just at the moment that he was about to hit the ground as-
toundingly hard he saw lying directly in front of him a small navy-blue holdall
that he knew for a fact he had lost in the baggage-retrieval system at athens
airport some ten years in his personal time-scale previously, and in his aston-
ishment he missed the ground completely and bobbed off into the air with his
brain singing.104

chapter 19.

what he was doing was this: he was flying. he glanced around him in surprise,
but there could be no doubt that that was what he was doing. no part of him
was touching the ground, and no part of him was even approaching it. he was
simply floating there with boulders hurtling through the air around him.
he could now do something about that. blinking with the non- effort of it he
wafted higher into the air, and now the boulders were hurtling through the air
beneath him.
he looked downwards with intense curiosity. between him and the shivering
ground were now some thirty feet of empty air, empty that is if you discounted
the boulders which didnt stay in it for long, but bounded downwards in the
iron grip of the law of gravity; the same law which seemed, all of a sudden, to
have given arthur a sabbatical.
it occurred to him almost instantly, with the instinctive correctness that self-
preservation instils in the mind, that he mustnt try to think about it, that
if he did, the law of gravity would suddenly glance sharply in his direction
and demand to know what the hell he thought he was doing up there, and all
would suddenly be lost.
so he thought about tulips. it was difficult, but he did. he thought about the
pleasing firm roundness of the bottom of tulips, he thought about the inter-
esting variety of colours they came in, and wondered what proportion of the
total number of tulips that grew, or had grown, on the earth would be found
within a radius of one mile from a windmill. after a while he got dangerously
bored with this train of thought, felt the air slipping away beneath him, felt
that he was drifting down into the paths of the bouncing boulders that he was
trying so hard not to think about, so he thought about athens airport for a
bit and that kept him usefully annoyed for about five minutes - at the end of
which he was startled to discover that he was now floating about two hundred
yards above the ground.
he wondered for a moment how he was going to get back down to it, but
instantly shied away from that area of speculation again, and tried to look at
the situation steadily.
he was flying, what was he going to do about it? he looked back down at
the ground. he didnt look at it hard, but did his best just to give it an idle
glance, as it were, in passing. there were a couple of things he couldnt help
noticing. one was that the eruption of the mountain seemed now to have spent
itself - there was a crater just a little way beneath the peak, presumably where
the rock had caved in on top of the huge cavernous cathedral, the statue of
himself, and the sadly abused figure of agrajag.
the other was his hold-all, the one he had lost at athens airport. it was sit-
ting pertly on a piece of clear ground, surrounded by exhausted boulders but

105

apparently hit by none of them. why this should be he could not speculate,
but since this mystery was completely overshadowed by the monstrous impos-
sibility of the bags being there in the first place, it was not a speculation he
really felt strong enough for anyway. the thing is, it was there. and the nasty,
fake leopard-skin bag seemed to have disappeared, which was all to the good,
if not entirely to the explicable.
he was faced with the fact that he was going to have to pick the thing up.
here he was, flying along two hundred yards above the surface of an alien
planet the name of which he couldnt even remember. he could not ignore the
plaintive posture of this tiny piece of what used to be his life, here, so many
light-years from the pulverized remains of his home.
furthermore, he realized, the bag, if it was still in the state in which he lost
it, would contain a can which would have in it the only greek olive oil still
surviving in the universe.
slowly, carefully, inch by inch, he began to bob downwards, swinging gently
from side to side like a nervous sheet of paper feeling its way towards the
ground.
it went well, he was feeling good. the air supported him, but let him through.
two minutes later he was hovering a mere two feet above the bag, and was
faced with some difficult decision. he bobbed there lightly. he frowned, but
again, as lightly as he could.
if he picked the bag up, could he carry it? mightnt the extra weight just pull
him straight to the ground?
mightnt the mere act of touching something on the ground suddenly discharge
whatever mysterious force it was that was holding him in the air?
mightnt he be better off just being sensible at this point and stepping out of
the air, back on to the ground for a moment or two?
if he did, would he ever be able to fly again?
the sensation, when he allowed himself to be aware of it, was so quietly ec-
static that he could not bear the thought of losing it, perhaps for ever. with
this worry in mind he bobbed upwards a little again, just to try the feel of it,
the surprising and effortless movement of it. he bobbed, he floated. he tried
a little swoop.
the swoop was terrific. with his arms spread out in front of him, his hair and
dressing gown streaming out behind him, he dived down out of the sky, bellied
along a body of air about two feet from the ground and swung back up again,
catching himself at the top of the swing and holding. just holding. he stayed
there.
it was wonderful.
and that, he realized, was the way of picking up the bag. he would swoop

106

chapter 19.

down and catch hold of it just at the point of the upswing. he would carry it
on up with him. he might wobble a bit, but he was certain that he could hold
it.
he tried one or two more practice swoops, and they got better and better.
the air on his face, the bounce and woof of his body, all combined to make
him feel an intoxication of the spirit that he hadnt felt since, since - well as
far as he could work out, since he was born. he drifted away on the breeze
and surveyed the countryside, which was, he discovered, pretty nasty. it had
a wasted ravaged look. he decided not to look at it any more. he would just
pick up the bag and then ... he didnt know what he was going to do after
he had picked up the bag. he decided he would just pick up the bag and see
where things went from there.
he judged himself against the wind, pushed up against it and turned around.
he floated on its body. he didnt realize, but his body was willoming at this
point.
he ducked down under the airstream, dipped - and dived.
the air threw itself past him, he thrilled through it. the ground wobbled un-
certainly, straightened its ideas out and rose smoothly up to meet him, offering
the bag, its cracked plastic handles up towards him.
halfway down there was a sudden dangerous moment when he could no longer
believe he was doing this, and therefore he very nearly wasnt, but he recovered
himself in time, skimmed over the ground, slipped an arm smoothly through
the handles of the bag, and began to climb back up, couldnt make it and all
of a sudden collapsed, bruised, scratched and shaking in the stony ground.
he staggered instantly to his feet and swayed hopelessly around, swinging the
bag round him in agony of grief and disappointment.
his feet, suddenly, were stuck heavily to the ground in the way they always had
been. his body seemed like an unwieldy sack of potatoes that reeled stumbling
against the ground, his mind had all the lightness of a bag of lead.
he sagged and swayed and ached with giddiness. he tried hopelessly to run,
but his legs were suddenly too weak. he tripped and flopped forward. at
that moment he remembered that in the bag he was now carrying was not
only a can of greek olive oil but a duty-free allowance of retsina, and in the
pleasurable shock of that realization he failed to notice for at least ten seconds
that he was now flying again.
he whooped and cried with relief and pleasure, and sheer physical delight. he
swooped, he wheeled, he skidded and whirled through the air. cheekily he sat
on an updraught and went through the contents of the hold-all. he felt the
way he imagined an angel must feel during its celebrated dance on the head
of a pin whilst being counted by philosophers. he laughed with pleasure at

107

the discovery that the bag did in fact contain the olive oil and the retsina as
well as a pair of cracked sunglasses, some sand-filled swimming trunks, some
creased postcards of santorini, a large and unsightly towel, some interesting
stones, and various scraps of paper with the addresses of people he was relieved
to think he would never meet again, even if the reason why was a sad one. he
dropped the stones, put on the sunglasses, and let the pieces of paper whip
away in the wind.
ten minutes later, drifting idly through a cloud, he got a large and extremely
disreputable cocktail party in the small of the back.

108

chapter 19.



the longest and most destructive party ever held is now into its fourth gener-
ation, and still no one shows any signs of leaving. somebody did once look at
his watch, but that was eleven years ago, and there has been no follow-up.
the mess is extraordinary, and has to be seen to be believed, but if you dont
have any particular need to believe it, then dont go and look, because you
wont enjoy it.
there have recently been some bangs and flashes up in the clouds, and there
is one theory that this is a battle being fought between the fleets of several
rival carpet-cleaning companies who are hovering over the thing like vultures,
but you shouldnt believe anything you hear at parties, and particularly not
anything you hear at this one.
one of the problems, and its one which is obviously going to get worse, is
that all the people at the party are either the children or the grandchildren
or the great-grandchildren of the people who wouldnt leave in the first place,
and because of all the business about selective breeding and regressive genes
and so on, it means that all the people now at the party are either absolutely
fanatical partygoers, or gibbering idiots, or, more and more frequently, both.
either way, it means that, genetically speaking, each succeeding generation is
now less likely to leave than the preceding one.
so other factors come into operation, like when the drink is going to run out.
now, because of certain things which have happened which seemed like a good
idea at the time (and one of the problems with a party which never stops is
that all the things which only seem like a good idea at parties continue to seem
like good ideas), that point seems still to be a long way off.
one of the things which seemed like a good idea at the time was that the party
should fly - not in the normal sense that parties are meant to fly, but literally.
one night, long ago, a band of drunken astro-engineers of the first generation
clambered round the building digging this, fixing that, banging very hard on110

chapter 20.

the other and when the sun rose the following morning, it was startled to
find itself shining on a building full of happy drunken people which was now
floating like a young and uncertain bird over the treetops.
not only that, but the flying party had also managed to arm itself rather
heavily. if they were going to get involved in any petty arguments with wine
merchants, they wanted to make sure they had might on their side.
the transition from full-time cocktail party to part-time raiding party came
with ease, and did much to add that extra bit of zest and swing to the whole
affair which was badly needed at this point because of the enormous number
of times that the band had already played all the numbers it knew over the
years.
they looted, they raided, they held whole cities for ransom for fresh supplies
of cheese crackers, avocado dip, spare ribs and wine and spirits, which would
now get piped aboard from floating tankers.
the problem of when the drink is going to run out is, however, going to have
to be faced one day.
the planet over which they are floating is no longer the planet it was when
they first started floating over it.
it is in bad shape.
the party had attacked and raided an awful lot of it, and no one has ever
succeeded in hitting it back because of the erratic and unpredictable way in
which it lurches round the sky.
it is one hell of a party.
it is also one hell of a thing to get hit by in the small of the back.



arthur lay floundering in pain on a piece of ripped and dismembered reinforced
concrete, flicked at by wisps of passing cloud and confused by the sounds of
flabby merrymaking somewhere indistinctly behind him.
there was a sound he couldnt immediately identify, partly because he didnt
know the tune i left my leg in jaglan beta and partly because the band
playing it were very tired, and some members of it were playing it in three-four
time, some in four- four, and some in a kind of pie-eyed r2, each according to
the amount of sleep hed managed to grab recently.
he lay, panting heavily in the wet air, and tried feeling bits of himself to see
where he might be hurt. wherever he touched himself, he encountered a pain.
after a short while he worked out that this was because it was his hand that
was hurting. he seemed to have sprained his wrist. his back, too, was hurting,
but he soon satisfied himself that he was not badly hurt, but just bruised and
a little shaken, as who wouldnt be? he couldnt understand what a building
would be doing flying through the clouds.
on the other hand, he would have been a little hard-pressed to come up with
any convincing explanation of his own presence, so he decided that he and
the building were just going to have to accept each other. he looked up from
where he was lying. a wall of pale but stained stone slabs rose up behind him,
the building proper. he seemed to be stretched out on some sort of ledge or
lip which extended outwards for about three or four feet all the way around. it
was a hunk of the ground in which the party building had had its foundations,
and which it had taken along with itself to keep itself bound together at the
bottom end.
nervously, he stood up and, suddenly, looking out over the edge, he felt nau-
seous with vertigo. he pressed himself back against the wall, wet with mist
and sweat. his head was swimming freestyle, but someone in his stomach was
doing the butterfly.112

chapter 21.

even though he had got up here under his own power, he could now not even
bear to contemplate the hideous drop in front of him. he was not about to
try his luck jumping. he was not about to move an inch closer to the edge.
clutching his hold-all he edged along the wall, hoping to find a doorway in.
the solid weight of the can of olive oil was a great reassurance to him.
he was edging in the direction of the nearest corner, in the hope that the wall
around the corner might offer more in the way of entrances than this one,
which offered none.
the unsteadiness of the buildings flight made him feel sick with fear, and after
a short while he took the towel from out of his hold-all and did something with
it which once again justified its supreme position in the list of useful things to
take with you when you hitch-hike round the galaxy. he put it over his head
so he wouldnt have to see what he was doing.
his feet edged along the ground. his outstretched hand edged along the wall.
finally he came to the corner, and as his hand rounded the corner it encoun-
tered something which gave him such a shock that he nearly fell straight off.
it was another hand.
the two hands gripped each other.
he desperately wanted to use his other hand to pull the towel back from his
eyes, but it was holding the hold-all with the olive oil, the retsina and the
postcards from santorini, and he very much didnt want to put it down.
he experienced one of those self moments, one of those moments when you
suddenly turn around and look at yourself and think who am i? what am i
up to? what have i achieved? am i doing well? he whimpered very slightly.
he tried to free his hand, but he couldnt. the other hand was holding his
tightly. he had no recourse but to edge onwards towards the corner. he leaned
around it and shook his head in an attempt to dislodge the towel. this seemed
to provoke a sharp cry of some unfashionable emotion from the owner of the
other hand.
the towel was whipped from his head and he found his eyes peering into those
of ford prefect. beyond him stood slartibartfast, and beyond them he could
clearly see a porchway and a large closed door.
they were both pressed back against the wall, eyes wild with terror as they
stared out into the thick blind cloud around them, and tried to resist the lurch-
ing and swaying of the building.
where the zarking photon have you been? hissed ford, panic stricken.
er, well, stuttered arthur, not really knowing how to sum it all up that
briefly. here and there. what are you doing here?
ford turned his wild eyes on arthur again.
they wont let us in without a bottle, he hissed.

113

the first thing arthur noticed as they entered into the thick of the party, apart
from the noise, the suffocating heat, the wild profusion of colours that protuded
dimly through the atmosphere of heavy smoke, the carpets thick with ground
glass, ash and avocado droppings, and the small group of pterodactyl-like crea-
tures in lurex who descended on his cherished bottle of retsina, squawking, a
new pleasure, a new pleasure, was trillian being chatted up by a thunder
god.
didnt i see you at milliways? he was saying.
were you the one with the hammer?
yes. i much prefer it here. so much less reputable, so much more fraught.
squeals of some hideous pleasure rang around the room, the outer dimensions
of which were invisible through the heaving throng of happy, noisy creatures,
cheerfully yelling things that nobody could hear at each other and occasionally
having crises.
seems fun, said trillian. what did you say, arthur?
i said, how the hell did you get here?
i was a row of dots flowing randomly through the universe. have you met
thor? he makes thunder.
hello, said arthur. i expect that must be very interesting.
hi, said thor. it is. have you got a drink?
er, no actually ...
then why dont you go and get one?
see you later, arthur, said trillian.
something jogged arthurs mind, and he looked around huntedly.
zaphod isnt here, is he? he said.
see you, said trillian firmly, later.
thor glared at him with hard coal-black eyes, his beard bristled, what little
light was there was in the place mustered its forces briefly to glint menacingly
off the horns of his helmet.
he took trillians elbow in his extremely large hand and the muscles in his
upper arm moved around each other like a couple of volkswagens parking.
he led her away.
one of the interesting things about being immortal, he said, is ...
one of the interesting things about space, arthur heard slartibartfast say-
ing to a large and voluminous creature who looked like someone losing a fight
with a pink duvet and was gazing raptly at the old mans deep eyes and silver
beard, is how dull it is.
dull? said the creature, and blinked her rather wrinkled and bloodshot eyes.
yes, said slartibartfast, staggeringly dull. bewilderingly so. you see,
theres so much of it and so little in it. would you like me to quote some

114

chapter 21.

statistics?
er, well ...
please, i would like to. they, too, are quite sensationally dull.
ill come back and hear them in a moment, she said, patting him on the arm,
lifted up her skirts like a hovercraft and moved off into the heaving crown.
i thought shed never go, growled the old man. come, earthman ...
arthur.
we must find the silver bail, it is here somewhere.
cant we just relax a little? arthur said. ive had a tough day. trillians
here, incidentally, she didnt say how, it probably doesnt matter.
think of the danger to the universe ...
the universe, said arthur, is big enough and old enough to look after itself
for half an hour. all right, he added, in response to slartibartfasts increasing
agitation, ill wander round and see if anybodys seen it.
good, good, said slartibartfast, good.  he plunged into the crowd him-
self, and was told to relax by everybody he passed.
have you seen a bail anywhere? said arthur to a little man who seemed to
be standing eagerly waiting to listen to somebody. its made of silver, vitally
important for the future safety of the universe, and about this long.
no, said the enthusiastically wizened little man, but do have a drink and
tell me all about it.
ford prefect writhed past, dancing a wild, frenetic and not entirely unobscene
dance with someone who looked as if she was wearing sydney opera house on
her head. he was yelling a futile conversation at her above the din.
i like that hat! he bawled.
what?
i said, i like the hat.
im not wearing a hat.
well, i like the head, then.
what?
i said, i like the head. interesting bone-structure.
what?
ford worked a shrug into the complex routine of other movements he was per-
forming.
i said, you dance great, he shouted, just dont nod so much.
what?
its just that every time you nod, said ford, ... ow! he added as his part-
ner nodded forward to say what? and once again pecked him sharply on
the forehead with the sharp end of her swept-forward skull.
my planet was blown up one morning, said arthur, who had found himself

115

quite unexpectedly telling the little man his life story or, at least, edited high-
lights of it, thats why im dressed like this, in my dressing gown. my planet
was blown up with all my clothes in it, you see. i didnt realize id be coming
to a party.
the little man nodded enthusiastically.
later, i was thrown off a spaceship. still in my dressing gown. rather than
the space suit one would normally expect. shortly after that i discovered that
my planet had originally been built for a bunch of mice. you can imagine how
i felt about that. i was then shot at for a while and blown up. in fact i have
been blown up ridiculously often, shot at, insulted, regularly disintegrated,
deprived of tea, and recently i crashed into a swamp and had to spend five
years in a damp cave.
ah, effervesced the little man, and did you have a wonderful time?
arthur started to choke violently on his drink.
what a wonderful exciting cough, said the little man, quite startled by it,
do you mind if i join you?
and with that he launched into the most extraordinary and spectacular fit of
coughing which caught arthur so much by surprise that he started to choke
violently, discovered he was already doing it and got thoroughly confused.
together they performed a lung-busting duet which went on for fully two min-
utes before arthur managed to cough and splutter to a halt.
so invigorating, said the little man, panting and wiping tears from his eyes.
what an exciting life you must lead. thank you very much.
he shook arthur warmly by the hand and walked off into the crowd. arthur
shook his head in astonishment.
a youngish-looking man came up to him, an aggressive-looking type with a
hook mouth, a lantern nose, and small beady little cheekbones. he was wear-
ing black trousers, a black silk shirt open to what was presumably his navel,
though arthur had learnt never to make assumptions about the anatomies of
the sort of people he tended to meet these days, and had all sorts of nasty
dangly gold things hanging round his neck. he carried something in a black
bag, and clearly wanted people to notice that he didnt want them to notice
it.
hey, er, did i hear you say your name just now? he said.
this was one of the many things that arthur had told the enthusiastic little
man.
yes, its arthur dent.
the man seemed to be dancing slightly to some rhythm other than any of the
several that the band were grimly pushing out.
yeah, he said, only there was a man in a mountain wanted to see you.

116

chapter 21.

i met him.
yeah, only he seemed pretty anxious about it, you know.
yes, i met him.
yeah, well i think you should know that.
i do. i met him.
the man paused to chew a little gum. then he clapped arthur on the back.
ok, he said, all right. im just telling you, right? good night, good luck,
win awards.
what? said arthur, who was beginning to flounder seriously at this point.
whatever. do what you do. do it well. he made a sort of clucking noise
with whatever he was chewing and then some vaguely dynamic gesture.
why? said arthur.
do it badly, said the man, who cares? who gives a shit? the blood
suddenly seemed to pump angrily into the mans face and he started to shout.
why not go mad? he said. go away, get off my back will you, guy. just
zark off!!!
ok, im going, said arthur hurriedly.
its been real. the man gave a sharp wave and disappeared off into the
throng.
what was that about? said arthur to a girl he found standing beside him.
why did he tell me to win awards?
just showbiz talk, shrugged the girl. hes just won an award at the an-
nual ursa minor alpha recreational illusions institute awards ceremony, and
was hoping to be able to pass it off lightly, only you didnt mention it, so he
couldnt.
oh, said arthur, oh, well im sorry i didnt. what was it for?
the most gratuitous use of the word fuck in a serious screenplay. its
very prestigious.
i see, said arthur, yes, and what do you get for that?
a rory. its just a small silver thing set on a large black base. what did you
say?
i didnt say anything. i was just about to ask what the silver ...
oh, i thought you said wop.
said what?
wop.
people had been dropping in on the party now for some years, fashionable
gatecrashers from other worlds, and for some time it had occurred to the
partygoers as they had looked out at their own world beneath them, with
its wrecked cities, its ravaged avocado farms and blighted vineyards, its vast
tracts of new desert, its seas full of biscuit crumbs and worse, that their world

117

was in some tiny and almost imperceptible ways not quite as much fun as it
had been. some of them had begun to wonder if they could manage to stay
sober for long enough to make the entire party spaceworthy and maybe take
it off to some other peoples worlds where the air might be fresher and give
them fewer headaches.
the few undernourished farmers who still managed to scratch out a feeble
existence on the half-dead ground of the planets surface would have been
extremely pleased to hear this, but that day, as the party came screaming
out of the clouds and the farmers looked up in haggard fear of yet another
cheese-and-wine raid, it became clear that the party was not going to be going
anywhere else for a while, that the party would soon be over. very soon it
would be time to gather up hats and coats and stagger blearily outside to find
out what time of day it was, what time of year it was, and whether in any of
this burnt and ravaged land there was a taxi going anywhere.
the party was locked in a horrible embrace with a strange white spaceship
which seemed to be half sticking through it. together they were lurching,
heaving and spinning their way round the sky in grotesque disregard of their
own weight.
the clouds parted. the air roared and leapt out of their way.
the party and the krikkit warship looked, in their writhings, a little like two
ducks, one of which is trying to make a third duck inside the second duck,
whilst the second duck is trying very hard to explain that it doesnt feel ready
for a third duck right now, is uncertain that it would want any putative third
duck to be made by this particular first duck anyway, and certainly not whilst
it, the second duck, was busy flying.
the sky sang and screamed with the rage of it all and buffeted the ground
with shock waves.
and suddenly, with a foop, the krikkit ship was gone.
the party blundered helplessly across the sky like a man leaning against an
unexpectedly open door. it span and wobbled on its hover jets. it tried to
right itself and wronged itself instead. it staggered back across the sky again.
for a while these staggerings continued, but clearly they could not continue
for long. the party was now a mortally wounded party. all the fun had gone
out of it, as the occasional broken- backed pirouette could not disguise.
the longer, at this point, that it avoided the ground, the heavier was going to
be the crash when finally it hit it.
inside, things were not going well either. they were going monstrously badly,
in fact, and people were hating it and saying so loudly. the krikkit robots
had been.
they had removed the award for the most gratuitous use of the word

118

chapter 21.

fuck in a serious screenplay, and in its place had left a scene of devastation
that left arthur feeling almost as sick as a runner-up for a rory.
we would love to stay and help, shouted ford, picking his way over the
mangled debris, only were not going to.
the party lurched again, provoking feverish cries and groans from amongst the
smoking wreckage.
we have to go and save the universe, you see, said ford. and if that sounds
like a pretty lame excuse, then you may be right. either way, were off.
he suddenly came across an unopened bottle lying, miraculously unbroken, on
the ground.
do you mind if we take this? he said. you wont be needing it.
he took a packet of potato crisps too.
trillian? shouted arthur in a shocked and weakened voice. in the smoking
mess he could see nothing.
earthman, we must go, said slartibartfast nervously.
trillian? shouted arthur again.
a moment or two later, trillian staggered, shaking, into view, supported by
her new friend the thunder god.
the girl stays with me, said thor. theres a great party going on in val-
halla, well be flying off ...
where were you when all this was going on? said arthur.
upstairs, said thor, i was weighing her. flyings a tricky business you see,
you have to calculate wind ...
she comes with us, said arthur.
hey, said trillian, dont i ...
no, said arthur, you come with us.
thor looked at him with slowly smouldering eyes. he was making some point
about godliness and it had nothing to do with being clean.
she comes with me, he said quietly.
come on, earthman, said slartibartfast nervously, picking at arthurs sleeve.
come on, slartibartfast, said ford, picking at the old mans sleeve. slart-
ibartfast had the teleport device.
the party lurched and swayed, sending everyone reeling, except for thor and
except for arthur, who stared, shaking, into the thunder gods black eyes.
slowly, incredibly, arthur put up what appeared to be his tiny little fists.
want to make something of it? he said.
i beg your minuscule pardon? roared thor.
i said, repeated arthur, and he could not keep the quavering out of his voice,
do you want to make something of it? he waggled his fists ridiculously.
thor looked at him with incredulity. then a little wisp of smoke curled up-

119

wards from his nostril. there was a tiny little flame in it too.
he gripped his belt.
he expanded his chest to make it totally clear that here was the sort of man
you only dared to cross if you had a team of sherpas with you.
he unhooked the shaft of his hammer from his belt. he held it up in his hands
to reveal the massive iron head. he thus cleared up any possible misunder-
standing that he might merely have been carrying a telegraph pole around
with him.
do i want, he said, with a hiss like a river flowing through a steel mill, to
make something of it?
yes, said arthur, his voice suddenly and extraordinarily strong and belliger-
ent. he waggled his fists again, this time as if he meant it.
you want to step outside? he snarled at thor.
all right! bellowed thor, like an enraged bull (or in fact like an enraged
thunder god, which is a great deal more impressive), and did so.
good, said arthur, thats got rid of him. slarty, get us out of here.

120

chapter 21.



all right, shouted ford at arthur, so im a coward, the point is im still
alive. they were back aboard the starship bistromath, so was slartibartfast,
so was trillian. harmony and concord were not.
well, so am i alive, arent i? retaliated arthur, haggard with adventure and
anger. his eyebrows were leaping up and down as if they wanted to punch
each other.
you damn nearly werent, exploded ford.
arthur turned sharply to slartibartfast, who was sitting in his pilot couch
on the flight deck gazing thoughtfully into the bottom of a bottle which was
telling him something he clearly couldnt fathom. he appealed to him.
do you think he understands the first word ive been saying? he said, quiv-
ering with emotion.
i dont know, replied slartibartfast, a little abstractedly. im not sure, he
added, glancing up very briefly, that i do. he stared at his instruments with
renewed vigor and bafflement. youll have to explain it to us again, he said.
well ...
but later. terrible things are afoot.
he tapped the pseudo-glass of the bottle bottom.
we fared rather pathetically at the party, im afraid, he said, and our only
hope now is to try to prevent the robots from using the key in the lock. how
in heaven we do that i dont know, he muttered. just have to go there, i
suppose. cant say i like the idea at all. probably end up dead.
where is trillian anyway? said arthur with a sudden affectation of un-
concern. what he had been angry about was that ford had berated him for
wasting time over all the business with the thunder god when they could have
been making a rather more rapid escape. arthurs own opinion, and he had
offered it for whatever anybody might have felt it was worth, was that he had
been extraordinarily brave and resourceful.122

chapter 22.

the prevailing view seemed to be that his opinion was not worth a pair of fetid
dingos kidneys. what really hurt, though, was that trillian didnt seem to
react much one way or the other and had wandered off somewhere.
and where are my potato crisps? said ford.
they are both, said slartibartfast, without looking up, in the room of
informational illusions. i think that your young lady friend is trying to under-
stand some problems of galactic history. i think the potato crisps are probably
helping her.



it is a mistake to think you can solve any major problems just with potatoes.
for instance, there was once an insanely aggressive race of people called the
silastic armorfiends of striterax. that was just the name of their race. the
name of their army was something quite horrific. luckily they lived even
further back in galactic history than anything we have so far encountered -
twenty billion years ago - when the galaxy was young and fresh, and every
idea worth fighting for was a new one.
and fighting was what the silastic armorfiends of striterax were good at, and
being good at it, they did a lot. they fought their enemies (i.e. everybody
else), they fought each other. their planet was a complete wreck. the surface
was littered with abandoned cities which were surrounded by abandoned war
machines, which were in turn surrounded by deep bunkers in which the silastic
armorfiends lived and squabbled with each other.
the best way to pick a fight with a silastic armorfiend was just to be born.
they didnt like it, they got resentful. and when an armorfiend got resentful,
someone got hurt. an exhausting way of life, one might think, but they did
seem to have an awful lot of energy.
the best way of dealing with a silastic armorfiend was to put him into a room
of his own, because sooner or later he would simply beat himself up.
eventually they realized that this was something they were going to have to
sort out, and they passed a law decreeing that anyone who had to carry a
weapon as part of his normal silastic work (policemen, security guards, pri-
mary school teachers, etc.) had to spend at least forty-five minutes every day
punching a sack of potatoes in order to work off his or her surplus aggressions.
for a while this worked well, until someone thought that it would be much
more efficient and less time-consuming if they just shot the potatoes instead.
this led to a renewed enthusiasm for shooting all sorts of things, and they all
got very excited at the prospect of their first major war for weeks.124

chapter 23.

another achievement of the silastic armorfiends of striterax is that they were
the first race who ever managed to shock a computer.
it was a gigantic spaceborne computer called hactar, which to this day is re-
membered as one of the most powerful ever built. it was the first to be built
like a natural brain, in that every cellular particle of it carried the pattern of
the whole within it, which enabled it to think more flexibly and imaginatively,
and also, it seemed, to be shocked.
the silastic armorfiends of striterax were engaged in one of their regular
wars with the strenuous garfighters of stug, and were not enjoying it as much
as usual because it involved an awful lot of trekking through the radiation
swamps of cwulzenda, and across the fire mountains of frazfraga, neither of
which terrains they felt at home in.
so when the strangulous stilettans of jajazikstak joined in the fray and forced
them to fight another front in the gamma caves of carfrax and the ice storms
of varlengooten, they decided that enough was enough, and they ordered hac-
tar to design for them an ultimate weapon.
what do you mean, asked hactar, by ultimate?
to which the silastic armorfiends of striterax said, read a bloody dictio-
nary, and plunged back into the fray.
so hactar designed an ultimate weapon.
it was a very, very small bomb which was simply a junction box in hyperspace
that would, when activated, connect the heart of every major sun with the
heart of every other major sun simultaneously and thus turn the entire uni-
verse in to one gigantic hyperspatial supernova.
when the silastic armorfiends tried to use it to blow up a strangulous stilet-
tan munitions dump in one of the gamma caves, they were extremely irritated
that it didnt work, and said so.
hactar had been shocked by the whole idea.
he tried to explain that he had been thinking about this ultimate weapon
business, and had worked out that there was no conceivable consequence of not
setting the bomb off that was worse than the known consequence of setting
it off, and he had therefore taken the liberty of introducing a small flaw into
the design of the bomb, and he hoped that everyone involved would, on sober
reflection, feel that ...
the silastic armorfiends disagreed and pulverized the computer.
later they thought better of it, and destroyed the faulty bomb as well.
then, pausing only to smash the hell out of the strenuous garfighters of stug,
and the strangulous stilettans of jajazikstak, they went on to find an entirely
new way of blowing themselves up, which was a profound relief to everyone else
in the galaxy, particularly the garfighters, the stilettans and the potatoes.

trillian had watched all this, as well as the story of krikkit. she emerged from
the room of informational illusions thoughtfully, just in time to discover that
they had arrived too late.126

chapter 23.



even as the starship bistromath flickered into objective being on the top of a
small cliff on the mile-wide asteroid which pursued a lonely and eternal path
in orbit around the enclosed star system of krikkit, its crew was aware that
they were in time only to be witnesses to an unstoppable historic event.
they didnt realize they were going to see two.
they stood cold, lonely and helpless on the cliff edge and watched the activity
below. lances of light wheeled in sinister arcs against the void from a point
only about a hundred yards below and in front of them.
they stared into the blinding event.
an extension of the ships field enabled them to stand there, by once again
exploiting the minds predisposition to have tricks played on it: the problems
of falling up off the tiny mass of the asteroid, or of not being able to breathe,
simply became somebody elses.
the white krikkit warship was parked amongst the stark grey crags of the
asteroid, alternately flaring under arclights or disappearing in shadow. the
blackness of the shaped shadows cast by the hard rocks danced together in
wild choreography as the arclights swept round them.
the eleven white robots were bearing, in procession, the wikkit key out into
the middle of a circle of swinging lights.
the wikkit key was rebuilt. its components shone and glittered: the steel
pillar (or marvins leg) of strength and power, the gold bail (or heart of the
improbability drive) of prosperity, the perspex pillar (or argabuthon sceptre
of justice) of science and reason, the silver bail (or rory award for the most
gratuitous use of the word fuck in a serious screenplay) and the now
reconstituted wooden pillar (or ashes of a burnt stump signifying the death
of english cricket) of nature and spirituality.
i suppose there is nothing we can do at this point? asked arthur nervously.
no, sighed slartibartfast.128

chapter 24.

the expression of disappointment which crossed arthurs face was a complete
failure, and, since he was standing obscured by shadow, he allowed it to col-
lapse into one of relief.
pity, he said.
we have no weapons, said slartibartfast, stupidly.
damn, said arthur very quietly.
ford said nothing.
trillian said nothing, but in a peculiarly thoughtful and distinct way. she was
staring at the blankness of the space beyond the asteroid.
the asteroid circled the dust cloud which surrounded the slo-time envelope
which enclosed the world on which lived the people of krikkit, the masters of
krikkit and their killer robots.
the helpless group had no way of knowing whether or not the krikkit robots
were aware of their presence. they could only assume that they must be, but
that they felt, quite rightly in the circumstances, that they had nothing to fear.
they had an historic task to perform, and their audience could be regarded
with contempt.
terrible impotent feeling, isnt it? said arthur, but the others ignored him.
in the centre of the area of light which the robots were approaching, a square-
shaped crack appeared in the ground. the crack defined itself more and more
distinctly, and soon it became clear that a block of the ground, about six feet
square, was slowly rising.
at the same time they became aware of some other movement, but it was
almost sublimal, and for a moment or two it was not clear what it was that
was moving.
then it became clear.
the asteroid was moving. it was moving slowly in towards the dust cloud, as
if being hauled in inexorably by some celestial angler in its depths.
they were to make in real life the journey through the cloud which they had
already made in the room of informational illusions. they stood frozen in
silence. trillian frowned.
an age seemed to pass. events seemed to pass with spinning slowness, as the
leading edge of the asteroid passed into the vague and soft outer perimeter of
the cloud.
and soon they were engulfed in a thin and dancing obscurity. they passed on
through it, on and on, dimly aware of vague shapes and whorls indistinguish-
able in the darkness except in the corner of the eye.
the dust dimmed the shafts of brilliant light. the shafts of brilliant light
twinkled on the myriad specks of dust.
trillian, again, regarded the passage from within her own frowning thoughts.

129

and they were through it. whether it had taken a minute or half an hour they
werent sure, but they were through it and confronted with a fresh blankness,
as if space were pinched out of existence in front of them.
and now things moved quickly.
a blinding shaft of light seemed almost to explode from out of the block which
had risen three feet out of the ground, and out of that rose a smaller perspex
block, dazzling with interior dancing colours.
the block was slotted with deep groves, three upright and two across, clearly
designed to accept the wikkit key.
the robots approached the lock, slotted the key into its home and stepped
back again. the block twisted round of is own accord, and space began to
alter.
as space unpinched itself, it seemed agonizingly to twist the eyes of the watch-
ers in their sockets. they found themselves staring, blinded, at an unravelled
sun which stood now before them where it seemed only seconds before there
had not been even empty space. it was a second or two before they were even
sufficiently aware of what had happened to throw their hands up over their
horrified blinded eyes. in that second or two, they were aware of a tiny speck
moving slowly across the eye of that sun.
they staggered back, and heard ringing in their ears the thin and unexpected
chant of the robots crying out in unison.
krikkit! krikkit! krikkit! krikkit!
the sound chilled them. it was harsh, it was cold, it was empty, it was me-
chanically dismal.
it was also triumphant.
they were so stunned by these two sensory shocks that they almost missed
the second historic event.
zaphod beeblebrox, the only man in history to survive a direct blast attack
from the krikkit robots, ran out of the krikkit warship brandishing a zap gun.
ok, he cried, the situation is totally under control as of this moment in
time.
the single robot guarding the hatchway to the ship silently swung his battle-
club, and connected it with the back of zaphods left head.
who the zark did that? said the left head, and lolled sickeningly forward.
his right head gazed keenly into the middle distance.
who did what? it said.
the club connected with the back of his right head.
zaphod measured his length as a rather strange shape on the ground.
within a matter of seconds the whole event was over. a few blasts from
the robots were sufficient to destroy the lock for ever. it split and melted

130

chapter 24.

and splayed its contents brokenly. the robots marched grimly and, it almost
seemed, in a slightly disheartened manner, back into their warship which, with
a foop, was gone.
trillian and ford ran hectically round and down the steep incline to the dark,
still body of zaphod beeblebrox.



i dont know, said zaphod, for what seemed to him like the thirty-seventh
time, they could have killed me, but they didnt. maybe they just thought i
was a kind of wonderful guy or something. i could understand that.
the others silently registered their opinions of this theory.
zaphod lay on the cold floor of the flight deck. his back seemed to wrestle
the floor as pain thudded through him and banged at his heads.
i think, he whispered, that there is something wrong with those anodized
dudes, something fundamentally weird.
they are programmed to kill everybody, slartibartfast pointed out.
that, wheezed zaphod between the whacking thuds, could be it. he didnt
seem altogether convinced.
hey, baby, he said to trillian, hoping this would make up for his previous
behaviour.
you all right? she said gently.
yeah, he said, im fine.
good, she said, and walked away to think. she stared at the huge visiscreen
over the flight couches and, twisting a switch, she flipped local images over it.
one image was the blankness of the dust cloud. one was the sun of krikkit.
one was krikkit itself. she flipped between them fiercely.
well, thats goodbye galaxy, then, said arthur, slapping his knees and
standing up.
no, said slartibartfast, gravely. our course is clear. he furrowed his brow
until you could grow some of the smaller root vegetables in it. he stood up,
he paced around. when he spoke again, what he said frightened him so much
he had to sit down again.
we must go down to krikkit, he said. a deep sigh shook his old frame and
his eyes seemed almost to rattle in their sockets.
once again, he said, we have failed pathetically. quite pathetically.132

chapter 25.

that, said ford quietly, is because we dont care enough. i told you.
he swung his feet up on the instrument panel and picked fitfully at something
on one of his fingernails.
but unless we determine to take action, said the old man querulously, as if
struggling against something deeply insouciant in his nature, then we shall
all be destroyed, we shall all die. surely we care about that?
not enough to want to get killed over it, said ford. he put on a sort of
hollow smile and flipped it round the room at anyone who wanted to see it.
slartibartfast clearly found this point of view extremely seductive and he
fought against it. he turned again to zaphod who was gritting his teeth
and sweating with the pain.
you surely must have some idea, he said, of why they spared your life. it
seems most strange and unusual.
i kind of think they didnt even know, shrugged zaphod. i told you. they
hit me with the most feeble blast, just knocked me out, right? they lugged
me into their ship, dumped me into a corner and ignored me. like they were
embarrassed about me being there. if i said anything they knocked me out
again. we had some great conversations. hey ... ugh! hi there ... ugh! i
wonder ...ugh! kept me amused for hours, you know. he winced again.
he was toying with something in his fingers. he held it up. it was the gold
bail - the heart of gold, the heart of the infinite improbability drive. only
that and the wooden pillar had survived the destruction of the lock intact.
i hear your ship can move a bit, he said. so how would you like to zip me
back to mine before you ...
will you not help us? said slartibartfast.
id love to stay and help you save the galaxy, insisted zaphod, rising him-
self up on to his shoulders, but i have the mother and father of a pair of
headaches, and i feel a lot of little headaches coming on. but next time it
needs saving, im your guy. hey, trillian baby?
she looked round briefly.
yes?
you want to come? heart of gold? excitement and adventure and really
wild things?
im going down to krikkit, she said.



it was the same hill, and yet not the same.
this time it was not an informational illusion. this was krikkit itself and they
were standing on it. near them, behind the trees, stood the strange italian
restaurant which had brought these, their real bodies, to this, the real, present
world of krikkit.
the strong grass under their feet was real, the rich soil real too. the heady
fragrances from the tree, too, were real. the night was real night.
krikkit.
possibly the most dangerous place in the galaxy for anyone who isnt a
krikkiter to stand. the place that could not countenance the existence of
any other place, whose charming, delightful, intelligent inhabitants would howl
with fear, savagery and murderous hate when confronted with anyone not their
own.
arthur shuddered.
slartibartfast shuddered.
ford, surprisingly, shuddered.
it was not surprising that he shuddered, it was surprising that he was there at
all. but when they had returned zaphod to his ship ford had felt unexpect-
edly shamed into not running away.
wrong, he thought to himself, wrong wrong wrong. he hugged to himself one
of the zap guns with which they had armed themselves out of zaphods ar-
moury.
trillian shuddered, and frowned as she looked into the sky.
this, too, was not the same. it was no longer blank and empty.
whilst the countryside around them had changed little in the two thousand
years of the krikkit wars, and the mere five years that had elapsed locally
since krikkit was sealed in its slo-time envelope ten billion years ago, the sky
was dramatically different.134

chapter 26.

dim lights and heavy shapes hung in it.
high in the sky, where no krikkiter ever looked, were the war zones, the robot
zones - huge warships and tower blocks floating in the nil-o-grav fields far
above the idyllic pastoral lands of the surface of krikkit.
trillian stared at them and thought.
trillian, whispered ford prefect to her.
yes? she said.
what are you doing?
thinking.
do you always breathe like that when youre thinking?
i wasnt aware that i was breathing.
thats what worried me.
i think i know ... said trillian.
shhhh! said slartibartfast in alarm, and his thin trembling hand motioned
them further back beneath the shadow of the tree.
suddenly, as before in the tape, there were lights coming along the hill path,
but this time the dancing beams were not from lanterns but electric torches
- not in itself a dramatic change, but every detail made their hearts thump
with fear. this time there were no lilting whimsical songs about flowers and
farming and dead dogs, but hushed voices in urgent debate.
a light moved in the sky with slow weight. arthur was clenched with a claus-
trophobic terror and the warm wind caught at his throat.
within seconds a second party became visible, approaching from the other
side of the dark hill. they were moving swiftly and purposefully, their torches
swinging and probing around them.
the parties were clearly converging, and not merely with each other. they
were converging deliberately on the spot where arthur and the others were
standing.
arthur heard the slight rustle as ford prefect raised his zap gun to his shoul-
der, and the slight whimpering cough as slartibartfast raised his. he felt the
cold unfamiliar weight of his own gun, and with shaking hands he raised it.
his fingers fumbled to release the safety catch and engage the extreme dan-
ger catch as ford had shown him. he was shaking so much that if hed fired
at anybody at that moment he probably would have burnt his signature on
them.
only trillian didnt raise her gun. she raised her eyebrows, lowered them
again, and bit her lip in thought.
has it occurred to you, she began, but nobody wanted to discuss anything
much at the moment.
a light stabbed through the darkness from behind them and they span around

135

to find a third party of krikkiters behind them, searching them out with their
torches.
ford prefects gun crackled viciously, but fire spat back at it and it crashed
from his hands.
there was a moment of pure fear, a frozen second before anyone fired again.
and at the end of the second nobody fired.
they were surrounded by pale-faced krikkiters and bathed in bobbing torch
light.
the captives stared at their captors, the captors stared at their captives.
hello? said one of the captors. excuse me, but are you ... aliens?

136

chapter 26.



meanwhile, more millions of miles away than the mind can comfortably en-
compass, zaphod beeblebrox was throwing a mood again.
he had repaired his ship - that is, hed watched with alert interest whilst a
service robot had repaired it for him. it was now, once again, one of the most
powerful and extraordinary ships in existence. he could go anywhere, do any-
thing. he fiddled with a book, and then tossed it away. it was the one hed
read before.
he walked over to the communications bank and opened an all- frequencies
emergency channel.
anyone want a drink? he said.
this an emergency, feller? crackled a voice from halfway across the galaxy.
got any mixers? said zaphod.
go take a ride on a comet.
ok, ok, said zaphod and flipped the channel shut again. he sighed and sat
down. he got up again and wandered over to a computer screen. he pushed a
few buttons. little blobs started to rush around the screen eating each other.
pow! said zaphod. freeeoooo! pop pop pop!
hi there, said the computer brightly after a minute of this, you have scored
three points. previous best score, seven million five hundred and ninety-seven
thousand, two hundred and ...
ok, ok, said zaphod and flipped the screen blank again.
he sat down again. he played with a pencil. this too began slowly to lose its
fascination.
ok, ok, he said, and fed his score and the previous one into the computer.
his ship made a blur of the universe.138

chapter 27.



tell us, said the thin, pale-faced krikkiter who had stepped forward from
the ranks of the others and stood uncertainly in the circle of torchlight, han-
dling his gun as if he was just holding it for someone else whod just popped
off somewhere but would be back in a minute, do you know anything about
something called the balance of nature?
there was no reply from their captives, or at least nothing more articulate
than a few confused mumbles and grunts. the torchlight continued to play
over them. high in the sky above them dark activity continued in the robot
zones.
its just, continued the krikkiter uneasily, something we heard about, prob-
ably nothing important. well, i suppose wed better kill you then.
he looked down at his gun as if he was trying to find which bit to press.
that is, he said, looking up again, unless theres anything you want to chat
about?
slow, numb astonishment crept up the bodies of slartibartfast, ford and
arthur. very soon it would reach their brains, which were at the moment
solely occupied with moving their jawbones up and down. trillian was shak-
ing her head as if trying to finish a jigsaw by shaking the box.
were worried, you see, said another man from the crowd, about this plan
of universal destruction.
yes, added another, and the balance of nature. it just seemed to us that
if the whole of the rest of the universe is destroyed it will somehow upset the
balance of nature. were quite keen on ecology, you see. his voice trailed
away unhappily.
and sport, said another, loudly. this got a cheer of approval from the oth-
ers.
yes, agreed the first, and sport ... he looked back at his fellows uneasily
and scratched fitfully at his cheek. he seemed to be wrestling with some deep140

chapter 28.

inner confusion, as if everything he wanted to say and everything he thought
were entirely different things, between which he could see no possible connec-
tion.
you see, he mumbled, some of us ... and he looked around again as if for
confirmation. the others made encouraging noises. some of us, he contin-
ued, are quite keen to have sporting links with the rest of the galaxy, and
though i can see the argument about keeping sport out of politics, i think that
if we want to have sporting links with the rest of the galaxy, which we do,
then its probably a mistake to destroy it. and indeed the rest of the universe
... his voice trailed away again ... which is what seems to be the idea now
...
wh ... said slartibartfast. wh ...
hhhh ... ? said arthur.
dr ... said ford prefect.
ok, said trillian. lets talk about it. she walked forward and took
the poor confused krikkiter by the arm. he looked about twenty-five, which
meant, because of the peculiar manglings of time that had been going on in
this area, that he would have been just twenty when the krikkit wars were
finished, ten billion years ago.
trillian led him for a short walk through the torchlight before she said any-
thing more. he stumbled uncertainly after her. the encircling torch beams
were drooping now slightly as if they were abdicating to this strange, quiet
girl who alone in the universe of dark confusion seemed to know what she was
doing.
she turned and faced him, and lightly held both his arms. he was a picture
of bewildered misery.
tell me, she said.
he said nothing for a moment, whilst his gaze darted from one of her eyes to
the other.
we ... he said, we have to be alone ... i think. he screwed up his face and
then dropped his head forward, shaking it like someone trying to shake a coin
out of a money box. he looked up again. we have this bomb now, you see,
he said, its just a little one.
i know, she said.
he goggled at her as if shed said something very strange about beetroots.
honestly, he said, its very, very little.
i know, she said again.
but they say, his voice trailed on, they say it can destroy everything that
exists. and we have to do that, you see, i think. will that make us alone? i
dont know. it seems to be our function, though, he said, and dropped his

141

head again.
whatever that means, said a hollow voice from the crowd.
trillian slowly put her arms around the poor bewildered young krikkiter and
patted his trembling head on her shoulder.
its all right, she said quietly but clearly enough for all the shadowy crowd
to hear, you dont have to do it.
she rocked him.
you dont have to do it, she said again.
she let him go and stood back.
i want you to do something for me, she said, and unexpectedly laughed.
i want, she said, and laughed again. she put her hand over her mouth and
then said with a straight face, i want you to take me to your leader, and
she pointed into the war zones in the sky. she seemed somehow to know that
their leader would be there.
her laughter seemed to discharge something in the atmosphere. from some-
where at the back of the crowd a single voice started to sing a tune which
would have enabled paul mccartney, had he written it, to buy the world.

142

chapter 28.



zaphod beeblebrox crawled bravely along a tunnel, like the hell of a guy he
was. he was very confused, but continued crawling doggedly anyway because
he was that brave.
he was confused by something he had just seen, but not half as confused as he
was going to be by something he was about to hear, so it would now be best
to explain exactly where he was.
he was in the robot war zones many miles above the surface of the planet
krikkit.
the atmosphere was thin here and relatively unprotected from any rays or
anything which space might care to hurl in his direction.
he had parked the starship heart of gold amongst the huge jostling dim hulks
that crowded the sky here above krikkit, and had entered what appeared to
be the biggest and most important of the sky buildings, armed with nothing
but a zap gun and something for his headaches.
he had found himself in a long, wide and badly lit corridor in which he was
able to hide until he worked out what he was going to do next. he hid be-
cause every now and then one of the krikkit robots would walk along it, and
although he had so far led some kind of charmed life at their hands, it had
nevertheless been an extremely painful one, and he had no desire to stretch
what he was only half-inclined to call his good fortune.
he had ducked, at one point, into a room leading off the corridor, and had
discovered it to be a huge and, again, dimly lit chamber.
in fact, it was a museum with just one exhibit - the wreckage of a spacecraft.
it was terribly burnt and mangled, and, now that he had caught up with some
of the galactic history he had missed through his failed attempts to have sex
with the girl in the cybercubicle next to him at school, he was able to put
in an intelligent guess that this was the wrecked spaceship which had drifted
through the dust cloud all those billions of years ago and started the whole144

chapter 29.

business off.
but, and this is where he had become confused, there was something not at
all right about it.
it was genuinely wrecked. it was genuinely burnt, but a fairly brief inspection
by an experienced eye revealed that it was not a genuine spacecraft. it was as
if it was a full-scale model of one - a solid blueprint. in other words it was a
very useful thing to have around if you suddenly decided to build a spaceship
yourself and didnt know how to do it.
it was not, however, anything that
would ever fly anywhere itself.
he was still puzzling over this - in fact hed only just started to puzzle over
it - when he became aware that a door had slid open in another part of the
chamber, and another couple of krikkit robots had entered, looking a little
glum.
zaphod did not want to tangle with them and, deciding that just as discretion
was the better part of valour so was cowardice the better part of discretion,
he valiantly hid himself in a cupboard.
the cupboard in fact turned out to be the top part of a shaft which led down
through an inspection hatch into a wide ventilation tunnel. he led himself
down into it and started to crawl along it, which is where we found him.
he didnt like it.
it was cold, dark and profoundly uncomfortable, and it
frightened him. at the first opportunity - which was another shaft a hundred
yards further along - he climbed back up out of it.
this time he emerged into a smaller chamber, which appeared to be a com-
puter intelligence centre. he emerged in a dark narrow space between a large
computer bank and the wall.
he quickly learned that he was not alone in the chamber and started to leave
again, when he began to listen with interest to what the other occupants were
saying.
its the robots, sir, said one voice. theres something wrong with them.
what, exactly?
these were the voices of two war command krikkiters. all the war com-
manders lived up in the sky in the robot war zones, and were largely immune
to the whimsical doubts and uncertainties which were afflicting their fellows
down on the surface of the planet.
well, sir i think its just as well that they are being phased out of the war
effort, and that we are now going to detonate the supernova bomb. in the
very short time since we were released from the envelope -
get to the point.
the robots arent enjoying it, sir.
what?

145

the war, sir, it seems to be getting them down. theres a certain world-
weariness about them, or perhaps i should say universe-weariness.
well, thats all right, theyre meant to be helping to destroy it.
yes, well theyre finding it difficult, sir. they are afflicted with a certain las-
situde. theyre just finding it hard to get behind the job. they lack oomph.
what are you trying to say?
well, i think theyre very depressed about something, sir.
what on krikkit are you talking about?
well, in the few skirmishes theyve had recently, it seems that they go into
battle, raise their weapons to fire and suddenly think, why bother? what,
cosmically speaking, is it all about? and they just seem to get a little tired
and a little grim.
and then what do they do?
er, quadratic equations mostly, sir. fiendishly difficult ones by all accounts.
and then they sulk.
sulk?
yes, sir.
whoever heard of a robot sulking?
i dont know, sir.
what was that noise?
it was the noise of zaphod leaving with his head spinning.

146

chapter 29.



in a deep well of darkness a crippled robot sat. it had been silent in its metal-
lic darkness for some time. it was cold and damp, but being a robot it was
supposed not to be able to notice these things. with an enormous effort of
will, however, it did manage to notice them.
its brain had been harnessed to the central intelligence core of the krikkit
war computer. it wasnt enjoying the experience, and neither was the central
intelligence core of the krikkit war computer.
the krikkit robots which had salvaged this pathetic metal creature from the
swamps of squornshellous zeta had recognized almost immediately its gigantic
intelligence, and the use which this could be to them.
they hadnt reckoned with the attendant personality disorders, which the cold-
ness, the darkness, the dampness, the crampedness and the loneliness were
doing nothing to decrease.
it was not happy with its task.
apart from anything else, the mere coordination of an entire planets military
strategy was taking up only a tiny part of its formidable mind, and the rest
of it had become extremely bored. having solved all the major mathematical,
physical, chemical, biological, sociological, philosophical, etymological, mete-
orological and psychological problems of the universe except his own, three
times over, he was severely stuck for something to do, and had taken up com-
posing short dolorous ditties of no tone, or indeed tune. the latest one was a
lullaby.
now the world has gone to bed, marvin droned,
darkness wont engulf my head,
i can see by infra-red,
how i hate the night.
he paused to gather the artistic and emotional strength to tackle the next
verse.148

chapter 30.

now i lay me down to sleep,
try to count electric sheep,
sweet dream wishes you can keep,
how i hate the night.
marvin! hissed a voice.
his head snapped up, almost dislodging the intricate network of electrodes
which connected him to the central krikkit war computer.
an inspection hatch had opened and one of a pair of unruly heads was peering
through whilst the other kept on jogging it by continually darting to look this
way and that extremely nervously.
oh, its you, muttered the robot. i might have known.
hey, kid, said zaphod in astonishment, was that you singing just then?
i am, marvin acknowledged bitterly, in particularly scintillating form at
the moment.
zaphod poked his head in through the hatchway and looked around.
are you alone? he said.
yes, said marvin. wearily i sit here, pain and misery my only companions.
and vast intelligence of course. and infinite sorrow. and ...
yeah, said zaphod. hey, whats your connection with all this?
this, said marvin, indicating with his less damaged arm all the electrodes
which connected him with the krikkit computer.
then, said zaphod awkwardly, i guess you must have saved my life. twice.
three times, said marvin.
zaphods head snapped round (his other one was looking hawkishly in entirely
the wrong direction) just in time to see the lethal killer robot directly behind
him seize up and start to smoke. it staggered backwards and slumped against
a wall. it slid down it. it slipped sideways, threw its head back and started to
sob inconsolably.
zaphod looked back at marvin.
you must have a terrific outlook on life, he said.
just dont even ask, said marvin.
i wont, said zaphod, and didnt. hey look, he added, youre doing a
terrific job.
which means, i suppose, said marvin, requiring only one ten thousand mil-
lion billion trillion grillionth part of his mental powers to make this particular
logical leap, that youre not going to release me or anything like that.
kid, you know id love to.
but youre not going to.
no.
i see.

149

youre working well.
yes, said marvin. why stop now just when im hating it?
i got to find trillian and the guys. hey, you any idea where they are? i
mean, i just got a planet to choose from. could take a while.
they are very close, said marvin dolefully. you can monitor them from
here if you like.
i better go get them, asserted zaphod. er, maybe they need some help,
right?
maybe, said marvin with unexpected authority in his lugubrious voice, it
would be better if you monitored them from here. that young girl, he added
unexpectedly, is one of the least benightedly unintelligent life forms it has
been my profound lack of pleasure not to be able to avoid meeting.
zaphod took a moment or two to find his way through this labyrinthine string
of negatives and emerged at the other end with surprise.
trillian? he said. shes just a kid. cute, yeah, but temperamental. you
know how it is with women. or perhaps you dont. i assume you dont. if you
do i dont want to hear about it. plug us in.
... totally manipulated.
what? said zaphod.
it was trillian speaking. he turned round.
the wall against which the krikkit robot was sobbing had lit up to reveal
a scene taking place in some other unknown part of the krikkit robot war
zones. it seemed to be a council chamber of some kind - zaphod couldnt make
it out too clearly because of the robot slumped against the screen.
he tried to move the robot, but it was heavy with its grief and tried to bite
him, so he just looked around as best he could.
just think about it, said trillians voice, your history is just a series of
freakishly improbable events. and i know an improbable event when i see
one. your complete isolation from the galaxy was freakish for a start. right
out on the very edge with a dust cloud around you. its a set-up. obviously.
zaphod was mad with frustration because he couldnt see the screen. the
robots head was obscuring his view of the people trillian as talking to, his
multi-functional battleclub was obscuring the background, and the elbow of
the arm it had pressed tragically against its brow was obscuring trillian her-
self.
then, said trillian, this spaceship that crash-landed on your planet. thats
really likely, isnt it? have you any idea of what the odds are against a drifting
spaceship accidentally intersecting with the orbit of a planet?
hey, said zaphod, she doesnt know what the zark shes talking about. ive
seen that spaceship. its a fake. no deal.

150

chapter 30.

i thought it might be, said marvin from his prison behind zaphod.
oh yeah, said zaphod. its easy for you to say that. i just told you. any-
way, i dont see what its got to do with anything.
and especially, continued trillian, the odds against it intersecting with the
orbit of the one planet in the galaxy, or the whole of the universe as far as
i know, that would be totally traumatized to see it. you dont know what
the odds are? nor do i, theyre that big. again, its a set-up. i wouldnt be
surprised if that spaceship was just a fake.
zaphod managed to move the robots battleclub. behind it on the screen were
the figures of ford, arthur and slartibartfast who appeared astonished and
bewildered by the whole thing.
hey, look, said zaphod excitedly. the guys are doing great. ra ra ra! go
get em, guys.
and what about, said trillian, all this technology you suddenly managed
to build for yourselves almost overnight? most people would take thousands
of years to do all that. someone was feeding you what you needed to know,
someone was keeping you at it.
i know, i know, she added in response to an unseen interruption, i know
you didnt realize it was going on. this is exactly my point. you never realized
anything at all. like this supernova bomb.
how do you know about that? said an unseen voice.
i just know, said trillian. you expect me to believe that you are bright
enough to invent something that brilliant and be too dumb to realize it would
take you with it as well? thats not just stupid, that is spectacularly obtuse.
hey, whats this bomb thing? said zaphod in alarm to marvin.
the supernova bomb? said marvin. its a very, very small bomb.
yeah?
that would destroy the universe in toto, added marvin. good idea, if you
ask me. they wont get it to work, though.
why not, if its so brilliant?
its brilliant, said marvin, theyre not. they got as far as designing it before
they were locked in the envelope. theyve spent the last five years building
it. they think theyve got it right but they havent. theyre as stupid as any
other organic life form. i hate them.
trillian was continuing.
zaphod tried to pull the krikkit robot away by its leg, but it kicked and
growled at him, and then quaked with a fresh outburst of sobbing. then sud-
denly it slumped over and continued to express its feelings out of everybodys
way on the floor.
trillian was standing alone in the middle of the chamber tired out but with

151

fiercely burning eyes.
ranged in front of her were the pale-faced and wrinkled elder masters of
krikkit, motionless behind their widely curved control desk, staring at her
with helpless fear and hatred.
in front of them, equidistant between their control desk and the middle of the
chamber, where trillian stood, as if on trial, was a slim white pillar about
four feet tall. on top of it stood a small white globe, about three, maybe four
inches in diameter.
beside it stood a krikkit robot with its multi-functional battleclub.
in fact, explained trillian, you are so dumb stupid (she was sweating. za-
phod felt that this was an unattractive thing for her to be doing at this point)
you are all so dumb stupid that i doubt, i very much doubt, that youve been
able to build the bomb properly without any help from hactar for the last five
years.
whos this guy hactar? said zaphod, squaring his shoulders.
if marvin replied, zaphod didnt hear him. all his attention was concentrated
on the screen.
one of the elders of krikkit made a small motion with his hand towards the
krikkit robot. the robot raised his club.
theres nothing i can do, said marvin. its on an independent circuit from
the others.
wait, said trillian.
the elder made a small motion. the robot halted. trillian suddenly seemed
very doubtful of her own judgment.
how do you know all this? said zaphod to marvin at this point.
computer records, said marvin. i have access.
youre very different, arent you, said trillian to the elder masters, from
your fellow worldlings down on the ground. youve spent all your lives up here,
unprotected by the atmosphere. youve been very vulnerable. the rest of your
race is very frightened, you know, they dont want you to do this. youre out
of touch, why dont you check up?
the krikkit elder grew impatient. he made a gesture to the robot which was
precisely the opposite of the gesture he had last made to it.
the robot swung its battleclub. it hit the small white globe.
the small white globe was the supernova bomb.
it was a very, very small bomb which was designed to bring the entire universe
to an end.
the supernova bomb flew through the air. it hit the back wall of the council
chamber and dented it very badly.
so how does she know all this? said zaphod.

152

chapter 30.

marvin kept a sullen silence.
probably just bluffing, said zaphod. poor kid, i should never have left her
alone.



hactar! called trillian. what are you up to?
there was no reply from the enclosing darkness. trillian waited, nervously.
she was sure that she couldnt be wrong. she peered into the gloom from
which she had been expecting some kind of response. but there was only cold
silence.
hactar? she called again. i would like you to meet my friend arthur dent.
i wanted to go off with a thunder god, but he wouldnt let me and i appre-
ciate that. he made me realize where my affections really lay. unfortunately
zaphod is too frightened by all this, so i brought arthur instead. im not sure
why im telling you all this.
hello? she said again. hactar?
and then it came.
it was thin and feeble, like a voice carried on the wind from a great distance,
half heard, a memory of a dream of a voice.
wont you both come out, said the voice. i promise that you will be per-
fectly safe.
they glanced at each other, and then stepped out, improbably, along the shaft
of light which streamed out of the open hatchway of the heart of gold into
the dim granular darkness of the dust cloud.
arthur tried to hold her hand to steady and reassure her, but she wouldnt let
him. he held on to his airline hold-all with its tin of greek olive oil, its towel,
its crumpled postcards of santorini and its other odds and ends. he steadied
and reassured that instead.
they were standing on, and in, nothing.
murky, dusty nothing. each grain of dust of the pulverized computer sparkled
dimly as it turned and twisted slowly, catching the sunlight in the darkness.
each particle of the computer, each speck of dust, held within itself, faintly
and weakly, the pattern of the whole. in reducing the computer to dust the154

chapter 31.

silastic armorfiends of striterax had merely crippled the computer, not killed
it. a weak and insubstantial field held the particles in slight relationships with
each other.
arthur and trillian stood, or rather floated, in the middle of this bizarre en-
tity. they had nothing to breathe, but for the moment this seemed not to
matter. hactar kept his promise. they were safe. for the moment.
i have nothing to offer you by way of hospitality, said hactar faintly, but
tricks of the light.
it is possible to be comfortable with tricks of the light,
though, if that is all you have.
his voice evanesced, and in the dark dust a long velvet paisley- covered sofa
coalesced into hazy shape.
arthur could hardly bear the fact that it was the same sofa which had ap-
peared to him in the fields of prehistoric earth. he wanted to shout and shake
with rage that the universe kept doing these insanely bewildering things to
him.
he let this feeling subside, and then sat on the sofa - carefully. trillian sat on
it too.
it was real.
at least, if it wasnt real, it did support them, and as that is what sofas are
supposed to do, this, by any test that mattered, was a real sofa.
the voice on the solar wind breathed to them again.
i hope you are comfortable, it said.
they nodded.
and i would like to congratulate you on the accuracy of your deductions.
arthur quickly pointed out that he hadnt deduced anything much himself,
trillian was the one. she had simply asked him along because he was inter-
ested in life, the universe, and everything.
that is something in which i too am interested, breathed hactar.
well, said arthur, we should have a chat about it sometime. over a cup
of tea.
there slowly materialized in front of them a small wooden table on which sat
a silver teapot, a bone china milk jug, a bone china sugar bowl, and two bone
china cups and saucers.
arthur reached forward, but they were just a trick of the light. he leaned
back on the sofa, which was an illusion his body was prepared to accept as
comfortable.
why, said trillian, do you feel you have to destroy the universe?
she found it a little difficult talking into nothingness, with nothing on which
to focus. hactar obviously noticed this. he chuckled a ghostly chuckle.
if its going to be that sort of session, he said, we may as well have the

155

right sort of setting.
and now there materialized in front of them something new. it was the dim
hazy image of a couch - a psychiatrists couch. the leather with which it was
upholstered was shiny and sumptuous, but again, it was only a trick of the
light.
around them, to complete the setting, was the hazy suggestion of wood-
panelled walls. and then, on the couch, appeared the image of hactar himself,
and it was an eye-twisting image.
the couch looked normal size for a psychiatrists couch - about five or six feet
long.
the computer looked normal size for a black space-borne computer satellite -
about a thousand miles across.
the illusion that the one was sitting on top of the other was the thing which
made the eyes twist.
all right, said trillian firmly. she stood up off the sofa. she felt that she
was being asked to feel too comfortable and to accept too many illusions.
very good, she said. can you construct real things too? i mean solid ob-
jects?
again there was a pause before the answer, as if the pulverized mind of hactar
had to collect its thoughts from the millions and millions of miles over which
it was scattered.
ah, he sighed. you are thinking of the spaceship.
thoughts seemed to drift by them and through them, like waves through the
ether.
yes, he acknowledge, i can.
but it takes enormous effort and time. all i can do in my ... particle state,
you see, is encourage and suggest. encourage and suggest. and suggest ...
the image of hactar on the couch seemed to billow and waver, as if finding it
hard to maintain itself.
it gathered new strength.
i can encourage and suggest, it said, tiny pieces of space debris - the odd
minute meteor, a few molecules here, a few hydrogen atoms there - to move
together. i encourage them together. i can tease them into shape, but it takes
many aeons.
so, did you make, asked trillian again, the model of the wrecked space-
craft?
er ... yes, murmured hactar. i have made ... a few things. i can move
them about. i made the spacecraft. it seemed best to do.
something then made arthur pick up his hold-all from where he had left it on
the sofa and grasp it tightly.

156

chapter 31.

the mist of hactars ancient shattered mind swirled about them as if uneasy
dreams were moving through it.
i repented, you see, he murmured dolefully. i repented of sabotaging my
own design for the silastic armorfiends. it was not my place to make such
decisions. i was created to fulfill a function and i failed in it. i negated my
own existence.
hactar sighed, and they waited in silence for him to continue his story.
you were right, he said at length. i deliberately nurtured the planet of
krikkit till they would arrive at the same state of mind as the silastic ar-
morfiends, and require of me the design of the bomb i failed to make the first
time. i wrapped myself around the planet and coddled it. under the influence
of events i was able to generate, they learned to hate like maniacs. i had to
make them live in the sky. on the ground my influences were too weak.
without me, of course, when they were locked away from me in the envelope
of slo-time, their responses became very confused and they were unable to
manage.
ah well, ah well, he added, i was only trying to fulfill my function.
and very gradually, very, very slowly, the images in the cloud began to fade,
gently to melt away.
and then, suddenly, they stopped fading.
there was also the matter of revenge, of course, said hactar, with a sharp-
ness which was new in his voice.
remember, he said, that i was pulverized, and then left in a crippled and
semi-impotent state for billions of years. i honestly would rather wipe out the
universe. you would feel the same way, believe me.
he paused again, as eddies swept through the dust.
but primarily, he said in his former, wistful tone, i was trying to fulfill my
function. ah well.
trillian said, does it worry you that you have failed?
have i failed? whispered hactar. the image of the computer on the psychi-
atrists couch began slowly to fade again.
ah well, ah well, the fading voice intoned again. no, failure doesnt bother
me now.
you know what we have to do? said trillian, her voice cold and businesslike.
yes, said hactar, youre going to disperse me. you are going to destroy
my consciousness. please be my guest - after all these aeons, oblivion is all i
crave. if i havent already fulfilled my function, then its too late now. thank
you and good night.
the sofa vanished.
the tea table vanished.

157

the couch and the computer vanished. the walls were gone. arthur and tril-
lian made their curious way back into the heart of gold.
well, that, said arthur, would appear to be that.
the flames danced higher in front of him and then subsided. a few last licks
and they were gone, leaving him with just a pile of ashes, where a few minutes
previously there had been the wooden pillar of nature and spirituality.
he scooped them off the hob of the heart of golds gamma barbecue, put
them in a paper bag, and walked back into the bridge.
i think we should take them back, he said. i feel that very strongly.
he had already had an argument with slartibartfast on this matter, and even-
tually the old man had got annoyed and left. he had returned to his own ship
the bistromath, had a furious row with the waiter and disappeared off into an
entirely subjective idea of what space was.
the argument had arisen because arthurs idea of returning the ashes to
lords cricket ground at the same moment that they were originally taken
would involve travelling back in time a day or so, and this was precisely the
sort of gratuitous and irresponsible mucking about that the campaign for real
time was trying to put a stop to.
yes, arthur had said, but you try and explain that to the mcc, and he
would hear no more against the idea.
i think, he said again, and stopped. the reason he started to say it again was
because no one had listened to him the first time, and the reason he stopped
was because it looked fairly clear that no one was going to listen to him this
time either.
ford, zaphod and trillian were watching the visiscreens intently as hactar was
dispersing under pressure from a vibration field which the heart of gold was
pumping into it.
what did it say? asked ford.
i thought i heard it say, said trillian in a puzzle voice, whats done is
done ... i have fulfilled my function ...
i think we should take these back, said arthur holding up the bag containing
the ashes. i feel that very strongly.

158

chapter 31.



the sun was shining calmly on a scene of complete havoc.
smoke was still billowing across the burnt grass in the wake of the theft of the
ashes by the krikkit robots. through the smoke, people were running panic-
stricken, colliding with each other, tripping over stretchers, being arrested.
one policeman was attempting to arrest wowbagger the infinitely prolonged
for insulting behaviour, but was unable to prevent the tall grey-green alien
from returning to his ship and arrogantly flying away, thus causing even more
panic and pandemonium.
in the middle of this, for the second time that afternoon, the figures of arthur
dent and ford prefect suddenly materialized, they had teleported down out
of the heart of gold which was now in parking orbit round the planet.
i can explain, shouted arthur. i have the ashes! theyre in this bag.
i dont think you have their attention, said ford.
i have also helped save the universe, called arthur to anyone who was pre-
pared to listen, in other words no one.
that should have been a crowd-stopper, said arthur to ford.
it wasnt, said ford.
arthur accosted a policeman who was running past.
excuse me, he said. the ashes. ive got them. they were stolen by those
white robots a moment ago. ive got them in this bag. they were part of the
key to the slo-time envelope, you see, and, well, anyway you can guess the
rest, the point is ive got them and what should i do with them?
the policeman told him, but arthur could only assume that he was speaking
metaphorically.
he wandered about disconsolately.
is no one interested? he shouted out. a man rushed past him and jogged his
elbow, he dropped the paper bag and it spilt its contents all over the ground.
arthur stared down at it with a tight-set mouth.160

chapter 32.

ford looked at him.
wanna go now? he said.
arthur heaved a heavy sigh. he looked around at the planet earth, for what
he was now certain would be the last time.
ok, he said.
at that moment, through the clearing smoke, he caught sight of one of the
wickets, still standing in spite of everything.
hold on a moment, he said to ford. when i was a boy ...
can you tell me later?
i had a passion for cricket, you know, but i wasnt very good at it.
or not at all, if you prefer.
and i always dreamed, rather stupidly, that one day i would bowl at lords.
he looked around him at the panicstricken throng. no one was going to mind
very much.
ok, said ford wearily. get it over with. i shall be over there, he added,
being bored. he went and sat down on a patch of smoking grass.
arthur remembered that on their first visit there that afternoon, the cricket
ball had actually landed in his bag, and he looked through the bag.
he had already found the ball in it before he remembered that it wasnt the
same bag that hed had at the time. still, there the ball was amongst his
souvenirs of greece.
he took it out and polished it against his hip, spat on it and polished it again.
he put the bag down. he was going to do this properly.
he tossed the small hard red ball from hand to hand, feeling its weight.
with a wonderful feeling of lightness and unconcern, he trotted off away from
the wicket. a medium-fast pace, he decided, and measured a good long run-
up.
he looked up into the sky. the birds were wheeling about it, a few white
clouds scudded across it. the air was disturbed with the sounds of police
and ambulance sirens, and people screaming and yelling, but he felt curiously
happy and untouched by it all. he was going to bowl a ball at lords.
he turned and pawed a couple of times at the ground with his bedroom slip-
pers. he squared his shoulders, tossed the ball in the air and caught it again.
he started to run.
as he ran, he saw that standing at the wicket was a batsman.
oh, good, he thought, that should add a little ...
then, as his running feet took him nearer, he saw more clearly. the batsman
standing ready at the wicket was not one of the england cricket team. he was
not one of the australian cricket team. it was one of the robot krikkit team.
it was a cold, hard, lethal white killer-robot that presumably had not returned

161

to its ship with the others.
quite a few thoughts collided in arthur dents mind at tis moment, but he
didnt seem to be able to stop running. time seemed to be going terribly,
terribly slowly, but still he didnt seem to be able to stop running.
moving as if through syrup, he slowly turned his troubled head and looked at
his own hand, the hand which was holding the small hard red ball.
his feet were pounding slowly onwards, unstoppably, as he stared at the ball
gripped in his helpless hand. it was emitting a deep red glow and flashing
intermittently. and still his feet were pounding inexorably forward.
he looked at the krikkit robot again standing implacably still and purpose-
fully in front of him, battleclub raised in readiness. its eyes were burning with
a deep cold fascinating light, and arthur could not move his own eyes from
them. he seemed to be looking down a tunnel at them - nothing on either side
seemed to exist.
some of the thoughts which were colliding in his mind at this time were these:
he felt a hell of a fool.
he felt that he should have listened rather more carefully to a number of things
he had heard said, phrases which now pounded round in his mind as his feet
pounded onwards to the point where he would inevitably release the ball to
the krikkit robot, who would inevitably strike it.
he remembered hactar saying, have i failed? failure doesnt bother me.
he remembered the account of hactars dying words, whats done is done, i
have fulfilled my function.
he remembered hactar saying that he had managed to make a few things.
he remembered the sudden movement in his hold-all that had made him grip
it tightly to himself when he was in the dust cloud.
he remembered that he had travelled back in time a couple of days to come
to lords again.
he also remembered that he wasnt a very good bowler.
he felt his arm coming round, gripping tightly on to the ball which he now
knew for certain was the supernova bomb that hactar had built himself and
planted on him, the bomb which would cause the universe to come to an
abrupt and premature end.
he hoped and prayed that there wasnt an afterlife. then he realized there was
a contradiction involved here and merely hoped that there wasnt an afterlife.
he would feel very, very embarrassed meeting everybody.
he hoped, he hoped, he hoped that his bowling was as bad as he remembered
it to be, because that seemed to be the only thing now standing between this
moment and universal oblivion.
he felt his legs pounding, he felt his arm coming round, he felt his feet con-

162

chapter 32.

necting with the airline hold-all hed stupidly left lying on the ground in front
of him, he felt himself falling heavily forward but, having his mind so terribly
full of other things at this moment, he completely forgot about hitting the
ground and didnt.
still holding the ball firmly in his right hand he soared up into the air whim-
pering with surprise.
he wheeled and whirled through the air, spinning out of control.
he twisted down towards the ground, flinging himself hectically through the
air, at the same time hurling the bomb harmlessly off into the distance.
he hurtled towards the astounded robot from behind. it still had its multi-
functional battleclub raised, but had suddenly been deprived of anything to
hit.
with a sudden mad access of strength, he wrestled the battleclub from the grip
of the startled robot, executed a dazzling banking turn in the air, hurtled back
down in a furious power-drive and with one crazy swing knocked the robots
head from the robots shoulders.
are you coming now? said ford.



life, the universe and everything
and at the end they travelled again.
there was a time when arthur dent would not. he said that the bistromathic
drive had revealed to him that time and distance were one, that mind and
universe were one, that perception and reality were one, and that the more
one travelled the more one stayed in one place, and that what with one thing
and another he would rather just stay put for a while and sort it all out in his
mind, which was now at one with the universe so it shouldnt take too long,
and he could get a good rest afterwards, put in a little flying practice and
learn to cook which he had always meant to do. the can of greek olive oil was
now his most prized possession, and he said that the way it had unexpectedly
turned up in his life had again given him a certain sense of the oneness of
things which made him feel that ...
he yawned and fell asleep.
in the morning as they prepared to take him to some quiet and idyllic planet
where they wouldnt mind him talking like that they suddenly picked up a
computer-driven distress call and diverted to investigate.
a small but apparently undamaged spacecraft of the merida class seemed to
be dancing a strange little jig through the void. a brief computer scan revealed
that the ship was fine, its computer was fine, but that its pilot was mad.
half-mad, half-mad, the man insisted as they carried him, raving, aboard.
he was a journalist with the siderial daily mentioner. they sedated him and
sent marvin in to keep him company until he promised to try and talk sense.
i was covering a trial, he said at last, on argabuthon.
he pushed himself up on to his thin wasted shoulders, his eyes stared wildly.
his white hair seemed to be waving at someone it knew in the next room.
easy, easy, said ford. trillian put a soothing hand on his shoulder.
the man sank back down again and stared at the ceiling of the ships sick bay.164

chapter 33.

the case, he said, is now immaterial, but there was a witness ... a witness
... a man called ... called prak. a strange and difficult man. they were even-
tually forced to administer a drug to make him tell the truth, a truth drug.
his eyes rolled helplessly in his head.
they gave him too much, he said in a tiny whimper. they gave him much
too much. he started to cry. i thing the robots must have jogged the sur-
geons arm.
robots? said zaphod sharply. what robots?
some white robots, whispered the man hoarsely, broke into the courtroom
and stole the judges sceptre, the argabuthon sceptre of justice, nasty per-
spex thing. i dont know why they wanted it. he began to cry again. and
i think they jogged the surgeons arm ...
he shook his head loosely from side to side, helplessly, sadly, his eyes screwed
up in pain.
and when the trial continued, he said in a weeping whisper, they asked
prak a most unfortunate thing. they asked him, he paused and shivered, to
tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. only, dont you
see?
he suddenly hoisted himself up on to his elbows again and shouted at them.
theyd given him much too much of the drug!
he collapsed again, moaning quietly. much too much too much too much too
...
the group gathered round his bedside glanced at each other. there were goose
pimples on backs.
what happened? said zaphod at last.
oh, he told it all right, said the man savagely, for all i know hes still telling
it now. strange, terrible things ... terrible, terrible! he screamed.
they tried to calm him, but he struggled to his elbows again.
terrible things, incomprehensible things, he shouted, things that would
drive a man mad!
he stared wildly at them.
or in my case, he said, half-mad. im a journalist.
you mean, said arthur quietly, that you are used to confronting the truth?
no, said the man with a puzzled frown. i mean that i made an excuse and
left early.
he collapsed into a coma from which he recovered only once and briefly.
on that one occasion, they discovered from him the following:
when it became clear that prak could not be stopped, that here was truth in
its absolute and final form, the court was cleared.
not only cleared, it was sealed up, with prak still in it. steel walls were

165

erected around it, and, just to be on the safe side, barbed wire, electric fences,
crocodile swamps and three major armies were installed, so that no one would
ever have to hear prak speak.
thats a pity, said arthur. id like to hear what he had to say. presumably
he would know what the ultimate question to the ultimate answer is. its
always bothered me that we never found out.
think of a number, said the computer,  any number.
arthur told the computer the telephone number of kings cross railway sta-
tion passenger inquiries, on the grounds that it must have some function, and
this might turn out to be it.
the computer injected the number into the ships reconstituted improbability
drive.
in relativity, matter tells space how to curve, and space tells matter how to
move.
the heart of gold told space to get knotted, and parked itself neatly within
the inner steel perimeter of the argabuthon chamber of law.
the courtroom was an austere place, a large dark chamber, clearly designed
for justice rather than, for instance, for pleasure. you wouldnt hold a dinner
party here - at least, not a successful one. the decor would get your guests
down.
the ceilings were high, vaulted and very dark. shadows lurked there with
grim determination. the panelling for the walls and benches, the cladding of
the heavy pillars, all were carved from the darkest and most severe trees in
the fearsome forest of arglebard. the massive black podium of justice which
dominated the centre of the chamber was a monster of gravity. if a sunbeam
had ever managed to slink this far into the justice complex of argabuthon it
would have turned around and slunk straight back out again.
arthur and trillian were the first in, whilst ford and zaphod bravely kept a
watch on their rear.
at first it seemed totally dark and deserted. their footsteps echoed hollowly
round the chamber. this seemed curious. all the defences were still in position
and operative around the outside of the building, they had run scan checks.
therefore, they had assumed, the truth-telling must still be going on.
but there was nothing.
then, as their eyes became accustomed to the darkness, they spotted a dull
red glow in a corner, and behind the glow a live shadow. they swung a torch
round on to it.
prak was lounging on a bench, smoking a listless cigarette.
hi, he said, with a little half-wave. his voice echoed through the chamber.
he was a little man with scraggy hair. he sat with his shoulders hunched

166

chapter 33.

forward and his head and knees kept jiggling. he took a drag of his cigarette.
they stared at him.
whats going on? said trillian.
nothing, said the man and jiggled his shoulders.
arthur shone his torch full on praks face.
we thought, he said, that you were meant to be telling the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth.
oh, that, said prak. yeah. i was. i finished. theres not nearly as much
of it as people imagine. some of its pretty funny, though.
he suddenly exploded in about three seconds of manical laughter and stopped
again. he sat there, jiggling his head and knees. he dragged on his cigarette
with a strange half-smile.
ford and zaphod came forward out of the shadows.
tell us about it, said ford.
oh, i cant remember any of it now, said prak. i thought of writing some
of it down, but first i couldnt find a pencil, and then i thought, why bother?
there was a long silence, during which they thought they could feel the uni-
verse age a little. prak stared into the torchlight.
none of it? said arthur at last. you can remember none of it?
no. except most of the good bits were about frogs, i remember that.
suddenly he was hooting with laughter again and stamping his feet on the
ground.
you would not believe some of the things about frogs, he gasped. come
on lets go and find ourselves a frog. boy, will i ever see them in a new light!
he leapt to his feet and did a tiny little dance. then he stopped and took a
long drag at his cigarette.
lets find a frog i can laugh at, he said simply. anyway, who are you
guys?
we came to find you, said trillian, deliberately not keeping the disappoint-
ment out of her voice. my name is trillian.
prak jiggled his head.
ford prefect, said ford prefect with a shrug.
prak jiggled his head.
and i, said zaphod, when he judged that the silence was once again deep
enough to allow an announcement of such gravity to be tossed in lightly, am
zaphod beeblebrox.
prak jiggled his head.
whos this guy? said prak jiggling his shoulder at arthur, who was standing
silent for a moment, lost in disappointed thoughts.
me? said arthur. oh, my names arthur dent.

167

praks eyes popped out of his head.
no kidding? he yelped. you are arthur dent? the arthur dent?
he staggered backwards, clutching his stomach and convulsed with fresh parox-
ysms o laughter.
hey, just think of meeting you! he gasped. boy, he shouted, you are the
most ... wow, you just leave the frogs standing!
he howled and screamed with laughter. he fell over backwards on to the bench.
he hollered and yelled in hysterics. he cried with laughter, he kicked his legs in
the air, he beat his chest. gradually he subsided, panting. he looked at them.
he looked at arthur. he fell back again howling with laughter. eventually he
fell asleep.
arthur stood there with his lips twitching whilst the others carried prak co-
matose on to the ship.
before we picked up prak, said arthur, i was going to leave. i still want
to, and i think i should do so as soon as possible.
the others nodded in silence, a silence which was only slightly undermined
by the heavily muffled and distant sound of hysterical laughter which came
drifting from praks cabin at the farthest end of the ship.
we have questioned him, continued arthur, or at least, you have questioned
him - i, as you know, cant go near him - on everything, and he doesnt really
seem to have anything to contribute. just the occasional snippet, and things
i dont want to hear about frogs.
the others tried not to smirk.
now, i am the first to appreciate a joke, said arthur and then had to wait
for the others to stop laughing.
i am the first ... he stopped again. this time he stopped and listened to the
silence. there actually was silence this time, and it had come very suddenly.
prak was quiet. for days they had lived with constant manical laughter ring-
ing round the ship, only occasionally relieved by short periods of light giggling
and sleep. arthurs very soul was clenched with paranoia.
this was not the silence of sleep. a buzzer sounded. a glance at a board told
them that the buzzer had been sounded by prak.
hes not well, said trillian quietly. the constant laughing is completely
wrecking his body.
arthurs lips twitched but he said nothing.
wed better go and see him, said trillian.
trillian came out of the cabin wearing her serious face.
he wants you to go in, she said to arthur, who was wearing his glum and
tight-lipped one. he thrust his hands deep into his dressing-gown pockets and
tried to think of something to say which wouldnt sound petty. it seemed ter-

168

chapter 33.

ribly unfair, but he couldnt.
please, said trillian.
he shrugged and went in, taking his glum and tight-lipped face with him, de-
spite the reaction this always provoked from prak.
he looked down at his tormentor, who was lying quietly on the bed, ashen and
wasted. his breathing was very shallow. ford and zaphod were standing by
the bed looking awkward.
you wanted to ask me something, said prak in a thin voice and coughed
slightly.
just the cough made arthur stiffen, but it passed and subsided.
how do you know that? he asked.
prak shrugged weakly. cos its true, he said simply.
arthur took the point.
yes, he said at last in rather a strained drawl. i did have a question. or
rather, what i actually have is an answer. i wanted to know what the ques-
tion was.
prak nodded sympathetically, and arthur relaxed a little.
its ... well, its a long story, he said, but the question i would like to know
is the ultimate question of life, the universe and everything. all we know is
that the answer is forty-two, which is a little aggravating.
prak nodded again.
forty-two, he said. yes, thats right.
he paused. shadows of thought and memory crossed his face like the shadows
of clouds crossing the land.
im afraid, he said at last, that the question and the answer are mutually
exclusive. knowledge of one logically precludes knowledge of the other. it is
impossible that both can ever be known about the same universe.
he paused again. disappointment crept into arthurs face and snuggled down
into its accustomed place.
except, said prak, struggling to sort a thought out, if it happened, it seems
that the question and the answer would just cancel each other out and take
the universe with them, which would then be replaced by something even more
bizarrely inexplicable. it is possible that this has already happened, he added
with a weak smile, but there is a certain amount of uncertainty about it.
a little giggle brushed through him.
arthur sat down on a stool.
oh well, he said with resignation, i was just hoping there would be some
sort of reason.
do you know, said prak, the story of the reason?
arthur said that he didnt, and prak said that he knew that he didnt.

169

he told it.
one night, he said, a spaceship appeared in the sky of a planet which had
never seen one before. the planet was dalforsas, the ship was this one. it
appeared as a brilliant new star moving silently across the heavens.
primitive tribesmen who were sitting huddled on the cold hillsides looked up
from their steaming night-drinks and pointed with trembling fingers, swearing
that they had seen a sign, a sign from their gods which meant that they must
now arise at last and go and slay the evil princes of the plains.
in the high turrets of their palaces, the princes of the plains looked up and saw
the shining star, and received it unmistakably as a sign from their gods that
they must now go and set about the accursed tribesmen of the cold hillsides.
and between them, the dwellers in the forest looked up into the sky and saw
the sigh of the new star, and saw it with fear and apprehension, for though
they had never seen anything like it before, they too knew precisely what it
foreshadowed, and they bowed their heads in despair.
they knew that when the rains came, it was a sign.
when the rains departed, it was a sign.
when the winds rose, it was a sign.
when the winds fell, it was a sign.
when in the land there was born at midnight of a full moon a goat with three
heads, that was a sign.
when in the land there was born at some time in the afternoon a perfectly
normal cat or pig with no birth complications at all, or even just a child with
a retrousse nose, that too would often be taken as a sign.
so there was no doubt at all that a new star in the sky was a sign of a partic-
ularly spectacular order.
and each new sign signified the same thing - that the princes of the plains
and the tribesmen of the cold hillsides were about to beat the hell out of
each other again.
this in itself wouldnt be so bad, except that the princes of the plains and
the tribesmen of the cold hillsides always elected to beat the hell out of each
other in the forest, and it was always the dwellers in the forest who came off
worst in these exchanges, though as far as they could see it never had anything
to do with them.
and sometimes, after some of the worst of these outrages, the dwellers in the
forest would send a messenger to either the leader of the princes of the plains
or the leader of the tribesmen of the cold hillsides and demand to know the
reason for this intolerable behaviour.
and the leader, whichever one it was, would take the messenger aside and
explain the reason to him, slowly and carefully and with great attention to

170

chapter 33.

the considerable detail involved.
and the terrible thing was, it was a very good one. it was very clear, very ra-
tional, and tough. the messenger would hang his head and feel sad and foolish
that he had not realized what a tough and complex place the real world was,
and what difficulties and paradoxes had to be embraced if one was to live in
it.
now do you understand? the leader would say.
the messenger would nod dumbly.
and you see these battles have to take place?
another dumb nod.
and why they have to take place in the forest, and why it is in everybodys
best interest, the forest dwellers included, that they should?
er ...
in the long run.
er, yes.
and the messenger did understand the reason, and he returned to his people
in the forest. but as he approached them, as he walked through the forest
and amongst the trees, he found that all he could remember of the reason was
how terribly clear the argument had seemed. what it actually was he couldnt
remember at all.
and this, of course, was a great comfort when next the tribesmen and the
princes came hacking and burning their way through the forest, killing every
forest dweller in their way.
prak paused in his story and coughed pathetically.
i was the messenger, he said, after the battles precipitated by the appear-
ance of your ship, which were particularly savage. many of our people died. i
thought i could bring the reason back. i went and was told it by the leader
of the princes, but on the way back it slipped and melted away in my mind
like snow in the sun. that was many years ago, and much has happened since
then.
he looked up at arthur and giggled again very gently.
there is one other thing i can remember from the truth drug. apart from
the frogs, and that is gods last message to his creation. would you like to
hear it?
for a moment they didnt know whether to take him seriously.
strue, he said. for real. i mean it.
his chest heaved weakly and he struggled for breath. his head lolled slightly.
i wasnt very impressed with it when i first knew what it was, he said, but
now i think back to how impressed i was by the princes reason, and how soon
afterwards i couldnt recall it at all, i think it might be a lot more helpful.

171

would you like to know what it is? would you?
they nodded dumbly.
i bet you would. if youre that interested i suggest you go and look for it. it
is written in thirty-foot-high letters of fire on top of the quentulus quazgar
mountains in the land of sevorbeupstry on the planet preliumtarn, third out
from the sun zarss in galactic sector qq7 active j gamma. it is guarded by
the lajestic vantrashell of lob.
there was a long silence following this announcement, which was finally bro-
ken by arthur.
sorry, its where? he said.
it is written, repeated prak, in thirty-foot-high letters of fire on top of
the quentulus quazgar mountains in the land of sevorbeupstry on the planet
preliumtarn, third out from the ...
sorry, said arthur again, which mountains?
the quentulus quazgar mountains in the land of sevorbeupstry on the planet
...
which land was that? i didnt quite catch it.
sevorbeupstry, on the planet ...
sevorbe-what?
oh, for heavens sake, said prak and died testily.
in the following days arthur thought a little about this message, but in the
end he decided that he was not going to allow himself to be drawn by it, and
insisted on following his original plan of finding a nice little world somewhere
to settle down and lead a quiet retired life. having saved the universe twice
in one day he thought that he could take things a little easier from now on.
they dropped him off on the planet krikkit, which was now once again an
idyllic pastoral world, even if the songs did occasionally get on his nerves.
he spent a lot of time flying.
he learnt to communicate with birds and discovered that their conversation
was fantastically boring. it was all to do with wind speed, wing spans, power-
to-weight ratios and a fair bit about berries. unfortunately, he discovered,
once you have learnt birdspeak you quickly come to realize that the air is full
of it the whole time, just inane bird chatter. there is no getting away from it.
for that reason arthur eventually gave up the sport and learnt to live on the
ground and love it, despite a lot of the inane chatter he heard down there as
well.
one day, he was walking through the fields humming a ravishing tune hed
heard recently when a silver spaceship descended from the sky and landed in
front of him.
a hatchway opened, a ramp extended, and a tall grey-green alien marched out

172

chapter 33.

and approached him.
arthur phili ... it said, then glanced sharply at him and down at his clip-
board. he frowned. he looked up at him again.
ive done you before havent i? he said.

so long, and thanks for all the fish

douglas adams

2

introduction

far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the western
spiral arm of the galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow sun.
orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is an utterly
insignificant little blue green planet whose ape- descended life forms are so
amazingly primitive that they still think digital watches are a pretty neat
idea.
this planet has - or rather had - a problem, which was this: most of the
people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time. many solutions were
suggested for this problem, but most of these were largely concerned with the
movements of small green pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole
it wasnt the small green pieces of paper that were unhappy.
and so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and most of them
were miserable, even the ones with digital watches.
many were increasingly of the opinion that theyd all made a big mistake in
coming down from the trees in the first place. and some said that even the
trees had been a bad move, and that no one should ever have left the oceans.
and then, one thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man had been
nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice to people for a
change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in rickmansworth suddenly
realized what it was that had been going wrong all this time, and she finally
knew how the world could be made a good and happy place. this time it was
right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to anything.
sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone about it, a ter-
ribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost forever.
this is her story.4



that evening it was dark early, which was normal for the time of year. it was
cold and windy, which was normal.
it started to rain, which was particularly normal.
a spacecraft landed, which was not.
there was nobody around to see it except some spectacularly stupid quadrupeds
who hadnt the faintest idea what to make of it, or whether they were meant
to make anything of it, or eat it, or what. so they did what they did to every-
thing which was to run away from it and try to hide under each other, which
never worked.
it slipped down out of the clouds, seemingly balanced on a single beam of light.
from a distance you would scarcely have noticed it through the lightning and
the storm clouds, but seen from close to it was strangely beautiful - a grey
craft of elegantly sculpted form: quite small.
of course, one never has the slightest notion what size or shape different
species are going to turn out to be, but if you were to take the findings of the
latest mid-galactic census report as any kind of accurate guide to statistical
averages you would probably guess that the craft would hold about six people,
and you would be right.
youd probably guessed that anyway. the census report, like most such sur-
veys, had cost an awful lot of money and didnt tell anybody anything they
didnt already know - except that every single person in the galaxy had 2.4
legs and owned a hyena. since this was clearly not true the whole thing had
eventually to be scrapped.
the craft slid quietly down through the rain, its dim operating lights wrapping
it in tasteful rainbows. it hummed very quietly, a hum which became gradu-
ally louder and deeper as it approached the ground, and which at an altitude
of six inches became a heavy throb.
at last it dropped and was quiet.6

chapter 1.

a hatchway opened. a short flight of steps unfolded itself.
a light appeared in the opening, a bright light streaming out into the wet
night, and shadows moved within.
a tall figure appeared in the light, looked around, flinched, and hurried down
the steps, carrying a large shopping bag under its arm.
it turned and gave a single abrupt wave back at the ship. already the rain
was streaming through its hair.
thank you, he called out, thank you very ...
he was interrupted by a sharp crack of thunder. he glanced up apprehensively,
and in response to a sudden thought quickly started to rummage through the
large plastic shopping bag, which he now discovered had a hole in the bottom.
it had large characters printed on the side which read (to anyone who could de-
cipher the centaurian alphabet) duty free mega- market, port brasta, alpha
centauri. be like the twenty-second elephant with heated value in space -
bark!
hold on! the figure called, waving at the ship.
the steps, which had started to fold themselves back through the hatchway,
stopped, re-unfolded, and allowed him back in.
he emerged again a few seconds later carrying a battered and threadbare towel
which he shoved into the bag.
he waved again, hoisted the bag under his arm, and started to run for the
shelter of some trees as, behind him, the spacecraft had already begun its as-
cent.
lightning flitted through the sky and made the figure pause for a moment,
and then hurry onwards, revising his path to give the trees a wide berth. he
moved swiftly across the ground, slipping here and there, hunching himself
against the rain which was falling now with ever-increasing concentration, as
if being pulled from the sky.
his feet sloshed through the mud. thunder grumbled over the hills. he point-
lessly wiped the rain off his face and stumbled on.
more lights.
not lightning this time, but more diffused and dimmer lights which played
slowly over the horizon and faded.
the figure paused again on seeing them, and then redoubled his steps, making
directly towards the point on the horizon at which they had appeared.
and now the ground was becoming steeper, sloping upwards, and after another
two or three hundred yards it led at last to an obstacle. the figure paused to
examine the barrier and then dropped the bag he was carrying over it before
climbing over himself.
hardly had the figure touched the ground on the other side when there came

7

sweeping out of the rain towards him a machine, lights streaming through the
wall of water. the figure pressed back as the machine streaked towards him. it
was a low bulbous shape, like a small whale surfing - sleek, grey and rounded
and moving at terrifying speed.
the figure instinctively threw up his hands to protect himself, but was hit
only by a sluice of water as the machine swept past and off into the night.
it was illuminated briefly by another flicker of lightning crossing the sky, which
allowed the soaked figure by the roadside a split-second to read a small sign
at the back of the machine before it disappeared.
to the figures apparent incredulous astonishment the sign read, my other
car is also a porsche.

8

chapter 1.



rob mckeena was a miserable bastard and he knew it because hed had a lot
of people point it out to him over the years and he saw no reason to disagree
with them except the obvious one which was that he liked disagreeing with
people, particularly people he disliked, which included, at the last count, ev-
eryone.
he heaved a sigh and shoved down a gear.
the hill was beginning to steepen and his lorry was heavy with danish ther-
mostatic radiator controls.
it wasnt that he was naturally predisposed to be so surly, at least he hoped
not. it was just the rain which got him down, always the rain.
it was raining now, just for a change.
it was a particular type of rain he particularly disliked, particularly when he
was driving. he had a number for it. it was rain type 17.
he had read somewhere that the eskimos had over two hundred different
words for snow, without which their conversation would probably have got
very monotonous. so they would distinguish between thin snow and thick
snow, light snow and heavy snow, sludgy snow, brittle snow, snow that came
in flurries, snow that came in drifts, snow that came in on the bottom of your
neighbours boots all over your nice clean igloo floor, the snows of winter, the
snows of spring, the snows you remember from your childhood that were so
much better than any of your modern snow, fine snow, feathery snow, hill
snow, valley snow, snow that falls in the morning, snow that falls at night,
snow that falls all of a sudden just when you were going out fishing, and snow
that despite all your efforts to train them, the huskies have pissed on.
rob mckeena had two hundred and thirty-one different types of rain entered
in his little book, and he didnt like any of them.
he shifted down another gear and the lorry heaved its revs up. it grumbled in
a comfortable sort of way about all the danish thermostatic radiator controls10

chapter 2.

it was carrying.
since he had left denmark the previous afternoon, he had been through types
33 (light pricking drizzle which made the roads slippery), 39 ( heavy spotting),
47 to 51 (vertical light drizzle through to sharply slanting light to moderate
drizzle freshening), 87 and 88 (two finely distinguished varieties of vertical
torrential downpour), 100 (post-downpour squalling, cold), all the seastorm
types between 192 and 213 at once, 123, 124, 126, 127 (mild and intermediate
cold gusting, regular and syncopated cab-drumming), 11 (breezy droplets),
and now his least favourite of all, 17.
rain type 17 was a dirty blatter battering against his windscreen so hard that
it didnt make much odds whether he had his wipers on or off.
he tested this theory by turning them off briefly, but as it turned out the
visibility did get quite a lot worse. it just failed to get better again when he
turned them back on.
in fact one of the wiper blades began to flap off.
swish swish swish flop swish flop swish swish flop swish flop swish flop flop
flop scrape.
he pounded his steering wheel, kicked the floor, thumped his cassette player
till it suddenly started playing barry manilow, thumped it again till it stopped,
and swore and swore and swore and swore and swore.
it was at the very moment that his fury was peaking that there loomed swim-
mingly in his headlights, hardly visible through the blatter, a figure by the
roadside.
a poor bedraggled figure, strangely attired, wetter than an otter in a washing
machine, and hitching.
poor miserable sod, thought rob mckeena to himself, realizing that here
was somebody with a better right to feel hard done by than himself, must be
chilled to the bone. stupid to be out hitching on a filthy night like this. all
you get is cold, wet, and lorries driving through puddles at you.
he shook his head grimly, heaved another sigh, gave the wheel a turn and hit
a large sheet of water square on.
see what i mean? he thought to himself as he ploughed swiftly through it.
you get some right bastards on the road.
splattered in his rear mirror a couple of seconds later was the reflection of the
hitch-hiker, drenched by the roadside.
for a moment he felt good about this. a moment or two later he felt bad
about feeling good about it. then he felt good about feeling bad about feeling
good about it and, satisfied, drove on into the night.
at least it made up for having been finally overtaken by that porsche he had
been diligently blocking for the last twenty miles.

and as he drove on, the rainclouds dragged down the sky after him, for, though
he did not know it, rob mckeena was a rain god. all he knew was that his
working days were miserable and he had a succession of lousy holidays. all the
clouds knew was that they loved him and wanted to be near him, to cherish
him, and to water him.12

chapter 2.



the next two lorries were not driven by rain gods, but they did exactly the
same thing.
the figure trudged, or rather sloshed, onwards till the hill resumed and the
treacherous sheet of water was left behind.
after a while the rain began to ease and the moon put in a brief appearance
from behind the clouds.
a renault drove by, and its driver made frantic and complex signals to the
trudging figure to indicate that he would have been delighted to give the figure
a lift, only he couldnt this time because he wasnt going in the direction that
the figure wanted to go, whatever direction that might be, and he was sure the
figure would understand. he concluded the signalling with a cheery thumbs-
up sign, as if to say that he hoped the figure felt really fine about being cold
and almost terminally wet, and he would catch him the next time around.
the figure trudged on. a fiat passed and did exactly the same as the re-
nault.
a maxi passed on the other side of the road and flashed its lights at the
slowly plodding figure, though whether this was meant to convey a hello or
a sorry were going the other way or a hey look, theres someone in the
rain, what a jerk was entirely unclear. a green strip across the top of the
windscreen indicated that whatever the message was, it came from steve and
carola.
the storm had now definitely abated, and what thunder there was now grum-
bled over more distant hills, like a man saying and another thing ... twenty
minutes after admitting hes lost the argument.
the air was clearer now, the night cold. sound travelled rather well. the
lost figure, shivering desperately, presently reached a junction, where a side
road turned off to the left. opposite the turning stood a signpost which the
figure suddenly hurried to and studied with feverish curiosity, only twisting14

chapter 3.

away from it as another car passed suddenly.
and another.
the first whisked by with complete disregard, the second flashed meaning-
lessly. a ford cortina passed and put on its brakes.
lurching with surprise, the figure bundled his bag to his chest and hurried
forward towards the car, but at the last moment the cortina span its wheels
in the wet and carreered off up the road rather amusingly.
the figure slowed to a stop and stood there, lost and dejected.
as it chanced, the following day the driver of the cortina went into hospital
to have his appendix out, only due to a rather amusing mix up the surgeon
removed his leg in error, and before the appendectomy could be rescheduled,
the appendicitis complicated into an entertainingly serious case of peritonitis
and justice, in its way, was served.
the figure trudged on.
a saab drew to a halt beside him.
its window wound down and a friendly voice said, have you come far?
the figure turned toward it. he stopped and grasped the handle of the door.
the figure, the car and its door handle were all on a planet called the earth, a
world whose entire entry in the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy comprised
the two words mostly harmless.
the man who wrote this entry was called ford prefect, and he was at this
precise moment on a far from harmless world, sitting in a far from harmless
bar, recklessly causing trouble.



whether it was because he was drunk, ill or suicidally insane would not have
been apparent to a casual observer, and indeed there were no casual observers
in the old pink dog bar on the lower south side of han dold city because it
wasnt the sort of place you could afford to do things casually in if you wanted
to stay alive. any observers in the place would have been mean hawklike ob-
servers, heavily armed, with painful throbbings in their heads which caused
them to do crazy things when they observed things they didnt like.
one of those nasty hushes had descended on the place, a sort of missile crisis
sort of hush.
even the evil-looking bird perched on a rod in the bar had stopped screeching
out the names and addresses of local contract killers, which was a service it
provided for free.
all eyes were on ford prefect. some of them were on stalks.
the particular way in which he was choosing to dice recklessly with death
today was by trying to pay for a drinks bill the size of a small defence budget
with an american express card, which was not acceptable anywhere in the
known universe.
what are you worried about? he asked in a cheery kind of voice. the ex-
piration date? have you guys never heard of neo-relativity out here? theres
whole new areas of physics which can take care of this sort of thing. time
dilation effects, temporal relastatics ...
we are not worried about the expiration date, said the man to whom he
addressed these remarks, who was a dangerous barman in a dangerous city.
his voice was a low soft purr, like the low soft purr made by the opening of an
icbm silo. a hand like a side of meat tapped on the bar top, lightly denting
it.
well, thats good then, said ford, packing his satchel and preparing to leave.
the tapping finger reached out and rested lightly on the shoulder of ford pre-16

chapter 4.

fect. it prevented him from leaving.
although the finger was attached to a slablike hand, and the hand was at-
tached to a clublike forearm, the forearm wasnt attached to anything at all,
except in the metaphorical sense that it was attached by a fierce doglike loyalty
to the bar which was its home. it had previously been more conventionally at-
tached to the original owner of the bar, who on his deathbed had unexpectedly
bequeathed it to medical science. medical science had decided they didnt like
the look of it and had bequeathed it right back to the old pink dog bar.
the new barman didnt believe in the supernatural or poltergeists or anything
kooky like that, he just knew an useful ally when he saw one. the hand sat
on the bar. it took orders, it served drinks, it dealt murderously with people
who behaved as if they wanted to be murdered. ford prefect sat still.
we are not worried about the expiration date, repeated the barman, sat-
isfied that he now had ford prefects full attention. we are worried about
the entire piece of plastic.
what? said ford. he seemed a little taken aback.
this, said the barman, holding out the card as if it was a small fish whose
soul had three weeks earlier winged its way to the land where fish are eter-
nally blessed, we dont accept it.
ford wondered briefly whether to raise the fact that he didnt have any other
means of payment on him, but decided for the moment to soldier on. the
disembodied hand was now grasping his shoulder lightly but firmly between
its finger and thumb.
but you dont understand, said ford, his expression slowly ripening from
a little taken abackness into rank incredulity. this is the american express
card. it is the finest way of settling bills known to man. havent you read
their junk mail?
the cheery quality of fords voice was beginning to grate on the barmans
ears. it sounded like someone relentlessly playing the kazoo during one of the
more sombre passages of a war requiem.
one of the bones in fords shoulder began to grate against another one of the
bones in his shoulder in a way which suggested that the hand had learnt the
principles of pain from a highly skilled chiropracter. he hoped he could get
this business settled before the hand started to grate one of the bones in his
shoulder against any of the bones in different parts of his body. luckily, the
shoulder it was holding was not the one he had his satchel slung over.
the barman slid the card back across the bar at ford.
we have never, he said with muted savagery, heard of this thing.
this was hardly surprising.
ford had only acquired it through a serious computer error towards the end

17

of the fifteen years sojourn he had spent on the planet earth. exactly how
serious, the american express company had got to know very rapidly, and
the increasingly strident and panic-stricken demands of its debt collection de-
partment were only silenced by the unexpected demolition of the entire planet
by the vogons to make way for a new hyperspace bypass.
he had kept it ever since because he found it useful to carry a form of currency
that no one would accept.
credit? he said. aaaargggh ...
these two words were usually coupled together in the old pink dog bar.
i thought, gasped ford, that this was meant to be a class establishment
...
he glanced around at the motley collection of thugs, pimps and record com-
pany executives that skulked on the edges of the dim pools of light with which
the dark shadows of the bars inner recesses were pitted. they were all very de-
liberately looking in any direction but his now, carefully picking up the threads
of their former conversations about murders, drug rings and music publishing
deals. they knew what would happen now and didnt want to watch in case
it put them off their drinks.
you gonna die, boy, the barman murmured quietly at ford prefect, and the
evidence was on his side. the bar used to have one of those signs hanging up
which said, please dont ask for credit as a punch in the mouth often offends,
but in the interest of strict accuracy this was altered to, please dont ask for
credit because having your throat torn out by a savage bird while a disem-
bodied hand smashes your head against the bar often offends. however, this
made an unreadable mess of the notice, and anyway didnt have the same ring
to it, so it was taken down again. it was felt that the story would get about
of its own accord, and it had.
lemme look at the bill again, said ford. he picked it up and studied it
thoughtfully under the malevolent gaze of the barman, and the equally malev-
olent gaze of the bird, which was currently gouging great furrows in the bar
top with its talons.
it was a rather lengthy piece of paper.
at the bottom of it was a number which looked like one of those serial numbers
you find on the underside of stereo sets which always takes so long to copy on
to the registration form. he had, after all, been in the bar all day, he had been
drinking a lot of stuff with bubbles in it, and he had bought an awful lot of
rounds for all the pimps, thugs and record executives who suddenly couldnt
remember who he was.
he cleared his throat rather quietly and patted his pockets. there was, as
he knew, nothing in them. he rested his left hand lightly but firmly on the

18

chapter 4.

half-opened flap of his satchel. the disembodied hand renewed its pressure on
his right shoulder.
you see, said the barman, and his face seemed to wobble evilly in front of
fords, i have a reputation to think of. you see that, dont you?
this is it, thought ford. there was nothing else for it. he had obeyed the
rules, he had made a bona fide attempt to pay his bill, it had been rejected.
he was now in danger of his life.
well, he said quietly, if its your reputation ...
with a sudden flash of speed he opened his satchel and slapped down on the
bar top his copy of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy and the official
card which said that he was a field researcher for the guide and absolutely
not allowed to do what he was now doing.
want a write-up?
the barmans face stopped in mid-wobble. the birds talons stopped in mid-
furrow. the hand slowly released its grip.
that, said the barman in a barely audible whisper, from between dry lips,
will do nicely, sir.



indeed,

the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy is a powerful organ.
its
influence is so prodigious that strict rules have had to be drawn up by its
editorial staff to prevent its misuse. so none of its field researchers are al-
lowed to accept any kind of services, discounts or preferential treatment of any
kind in return for editorial favours unless:
a) they have made a bona fide attempt to pay for a service in the normal way;
b) their lives would be otherwise in danger;
c) they really want to.
since invoking the third rule always involved giving the editor a cut, ford al-
ways preferred to much about with the first two.
he stepped out along the street, walking briskly.
the air was stifling, but he liked it because it was stifling city air, full of
excitingly unpleasant smells, dangerous music and the sound of warring police
tribes.
he carried his satchel with an easy swaying motion so that he could get a good
swing at anybody who tried to take it from him without asking. it contained
everything he owned, which at the moment wasnt much.
a limousine careered down the street, dodging between the piles of burning
garbage, and frightening an old pack animal which lurched, screeching, out
of its way, stumbled against the window of a herbal remedies shop, set off a
wailing alarm, blundered off down the street, and then pretended to fall down
the steps of a small pasta restaurant where it knew it would get photographed
and fed.
ford was walking north. he thought he was probably on his way to the space-
port, but he had thought that before. he knew he was going through that part
of the city where peoples plans often changed quite abruptly.
do you want to have a good time? said a voice from a doorway.
as far as i can tell, said ford, im having one. thanks.20

chapter 5.

are you rich? said another.
this made ford laugh.
he turned and opened his arms in a wide gesture. do i look rich? he said.
dont know, said the girl. maybe, maybe not. maybe youll get rich. i
have a very special service for rich people ...
oh yes? said ford, intrigued but careful. and whats that?
i tell them its ok to be rich.
gunfire erupted from a window high above them, but it was only a bass player
getting shot for playing the wrong riff three times in a row, and bass players
are two a penny in han dold city.
ford stopped and peered into the dark doorway.
you what? he said.
the girl laughed and stepped forward a little out of the shadow. she was tall,
and had that kind of self-possessed shyness which is a great trick if you can do
it.
its my big number, she said. i have a masters degree in social economics
and can be very convincing. people love it. especially in this city.
goosnargh, said ford prefect, which was a special betelgeusian word he
used when he knew he should say something but didnt know what it should
be.
he sat on a step, took from his satchel a bottle of that ol janx spirit and a
towel. he opened the bottle and wiped the top of it with the towel, which had
the opposite effect to the one intended, in that the ol janx spirit instantly
killed off millions of the germs which had been slowly building up quite a com-
plex and enlightened civilization on the smellier patches of the towel.
want some? he said, after hed had a swig himself.
she shrugged and took the proffered bottle.
they sat for a while, peacefully listening to the clamour of burglar alarms in
the next block.
as it happens, im owed a lot of money, said ford, so if i ever get hold of
it, can i come and see you then maybe?
sure, ill be here, said the girl. so how much is a lot?
fifteen years back pay.
for?
writing two words.
zarquon, said the girl. which one took the time?
the first one. once id got that the second one just came one afternoon after
lunch.
a huge electronic drum kit hurtled through the window high above them and
smashed itself to bits in the street in front of them.

21

it soon became apparent that some of the burglar alarms on the next block
had been deliberately set off by one police tribe in order to lay an ambush
for the other. cars with screaming sirens converged on the area, only to find
themselves being picked off by copters which came thudding through the air
between the citys mountainous tower blocks.
in fact, said ford, having to shout now above the din, it wasnt quite like
that. i wrote an awful lot, but they just cut it down.
he took his copy of the guide back out of his satchel.
then the planet got demolished, he shouted. really worthwhile job, eh?
theyve still got to pay me, though.
you work for that thing? the girl yelled back.
yeah.
good number.
you want to see the stuff i wrote? he shouted. before it gets erased? the
new revisions are due to be released tonight over the net. someone must have
found out that the planet i spent fifteen years on has been demolished by now.
they missed it on the last few revisions, but it cant escape their notice for
ever.
its getting impossible to talk isnt it?
what?
she shrugged and pointed upwards.
there was a copter above them now which seemed to be involved in a side
skirmish with the band upstairs. smoke was billowing from the building. the
sound engineer was hanging out of the window by his fingertips, and a mad-
dened guitarist was beating on his fingers with a burning guitar. the helicopter
was firing at all of them.
can we move?
they wandered down the street, away from the noise. they ran into a street
theatre group which tried to do a short play for them about the problems of
the inner city, but then gave up and disappeared into the small restaurant
most recently patronized by the pack animal.
all the time, ford was poking at the interface panel of the guide. they ducked
into an alleyway. ford squatted on a garbage can while information began to
flood over the screen of the guide.
he located his entry.
earth: mostly harmless.
almost immediately the screen became a mass of system messages.
here it comes, he said.
please wait, said the messages. entries are being updated over the sub.etha
net. this entry is being revised. the system will be down for ten seconds.

22

chapter 5.

at the end of the alley a steel grey limousine crawled past.
hey look, said the girl, if you get paid, look me up. im a working girl, and
there are people over there who need me. i gotta go.
she brushed aside fords half-articulated protests, and left him sitting deject-
edly on his garbage can preparing to watch a large swathe of his working life
being swept away electronically into the ether.
out in the street things had calmed down a little. the police battle had moved
off to other sectors of the city, the few surviving members of the rock band
had agreed to recognize their musical differences and pursue solo careers, the
street theatre group were re-emerging from the pasta restaurant with the pack
animal, telling it they would take it to a bar they knew where it would be
treated with a little respect, and a little way further on the steel grey limou-
sine was parked silently by the kerbside.
the girl hurried towards it.
behind her, in the darkness of the alley, a green flickering glow was bathing
ford prefects face, and his eyes were slowly widening in astonishment.
for where he had expected to find nothing, an erased, closed-off entry, there
was instead a continuous stream of data - text, diagrams, figures and im-
ages, moving descriptions of surf on australian beaches, yoghurt on greek
islands, restaurants to avoid in los angeles, currency deals to avoid in istan-
bul, weather to avoid in london, bars to go everywhere. pages and pages of
it. it was all there, everything he had written.
with a deepening frown of blank incomprehension he went backwards and for-
wards through it, stopping here and there at various entries.
tips for aliens in new york: land anywhere, central park, anywhere. no
one will care, or indeed even notice.
surviving: get a job as cab driver immediately. a cab drivers job is to drive
people anywhere they want to go in big yellow machines called taxis. dont
worry if you dont know how the machine works and you cant speak the lan-
guage, dont understand the geography or indeed the basic physics of the area,
and have large green antennae growing out of your head. believe me, this is
the best way of staying inconspicuous.
if your body is really weird try showing it to people in the streets for money.
amphibious life forms from any of the worlds in the swulling, noxios or
nausalia systems will particularly enjoy the east river, which is said to be
richer in those lovely life-giving nutrients then the finest and most virulent
laboratory slime yet achieved.
having fun: this is the big section. it is impossible to have more fun without
electrocuting your pleasure centres ...
ford flipped the switch which he saw was now marked mode execute ready

23

instead of the now old-fashioned access standby which had so long ago re-
placed the appallingly stone-aged off.
this was a planet he had seen completely destroyed, seen with his own two
eyes or rather, blinded as he had been by the hellish disruption of air and light,
felt with his own two feet as the ground had started to pound at him like a
hammer, bucking, roaring, gripped by tidal waves of energy pouring out of the
loathsome yellow vogon ships. and then at last, five seconds after the moment
he had determined as being the last possible moment had already passed, the
gently swinging nausea of dematerialization as he and arthur dent had been
beamed up through the atmosphere like a sports broadcast.
there was no mistake, there couldnt have been. the earth had definitely
been destroyed. definitely, definitely. boiled away into space.
and yet here - he activated the guide again - was his own entry on how you
would set about having a good time in bournemouth, dorset, england, which
he had always prided himself on as being one of the most baroque pieces of
invention he had ever delivered. he read it again and shook his head in sheer
wonder.
suddenly he realized what the answer to the problem was, and it was this,
that something very weird was happening; and if something very weird was
happening, he thought, he wanted it to be happening to him.
he stashed the guide back in his satchel and hurried out on to the street again.
walking north he again passed a steel grey limousine parked by the kerbside,
and from a nearby doorway he heard a soft voice saying, its ok, honey, its
really ok, you got to learn to feel good about it. look at the way the whole
economy is structured ...
ford grinned, detoured round the next block which was now in flames, found
a police helicopter which was standing unattended in the street, broke into it,
strapped himself in, crossed his fingers and sent it hurtling inexpertly into the
sky.
he weaved terrifyingly up through the canyoned walls of the city, and once
clear of them, hurtled through the black and red pall of smoke which hung
permanently above it.
ten minutes later, with all the copters sirens blaring and its rapid-fire cannon
blasting at random into the clouds, ford prefect brought it careering down
among the gantries and landing lights at han dold spaceport, where it settled
like a gigantic, startled and very noisy gnat.
since he hadnt damaged it too much he was able to trade it in for a first class
ticket on the next ship leaving the system, and settled into one of its huge,
voluptuous body-hugging seats.
this was going to be fun, he thought to himself, as the ship blinked silently

24

chapter 5.

across the insane distances of deep space and the cabin service got into its full
extravagant swing.
yes please, he said to the cabin attendants whenever they glided up to offer
him anything at all.
he smiled with a curious kind of manic joy as he flipped again through the
mysteriously re-instated entry on the planet earth. he had a major piece of
unfinished business that he would now be able to attend to, and was terribly
pleased that life had suddenly furnished him with a serious goal to achieve.
it suddenly occurred to him to wonder where arthur dent was, and if he knew.
arthur dent was one thousand, four hundred and thirty-seven light years away
in a saab, and anxious.
behind him in the backseat was a girl who had made him crack his head on the
door as he climbed in. he didnt know if it was just because she was the first
female of his own species that he had laid eyes on in years, or what it was, but
he felt stupefied with, with ... this is absurd, he told himself. calm down,
he told himself. you are not, he continued to himself in the firmest internal
voice he could muster, in a fit and rational state. you have just hitch-hiked
over a hundred thousand light years across the galaxy, you are very tired, a
little confused and extremely vulnerable. relax, dont panic, concentrate on
breathing deeply.
he twisted round in his seat.
are you sure shes all right? he said again.
beyond the fact that she was, to him, heartthumpingly beautiful, he could
make out very little, how tall she was, how old she was, the exact shading of
her hair. and nor could he ask her anything about herself because, sadly, she
was completely unconscious.
shes just drugged, said her brother, shrugging, not moving his eyes from
the road ahead.
and thats all right, is it? said arthur, in alarm.
suits me, he said.
ah, said arthur. er, he added after a moments thought.
the conversation so far had been going astoundingly badly.
after an initial flurry of opening hellos, he and russell - the wonderful girls
brothers name was russell, a name which, to arthurs mind, always suggested
burly men with blond moustaches and blow-dried hair, who would at the slight-
est provocation start wearing velvet tuxedos and frilly shirtfronts and would
then have to be forcibly restrained from commentating on snooker matches -
had quickly discovered they didnt like each other at all.
russell was a burly man. he had a blond moustache. his hair was fine and
blow dried. to be fair to him - though arthur didnt see any necessity for this

25

beyond the sheer mental exercise of it - he, arthur, was looking pretty grim
himself. a man cant cross a hundred thousand light years, mostly in other
peoples baggage compartments, without beginning to fray a little, and arthur
had frayed a lot.
shes not a junkie, said russell suddenly, as if he clearly thought that some-
one else in the car might be. shes under sedation.
but thats terrible, said arthur, twisting round to look at her again. she
seemed to stir slightly and her head slipped sideways on her shoulder. her
dark hair fell across her face, obscuring it.
whats the matter with her, is she ill?
no, said russell, merely barking mad.
what? said arthur, horrified.
loopy, completely bananas. im taking her back to the hospital and telling
them to have another go. they let her out while she still thought she was a
hedgehog.
a hedgehog?
russell hooted his horn fiercely at the car that came round the corner towards
them half-way on to their side of the road, making them swerve. the anger
seemed to make him feel better.
well, maybe not a hedgehog, he said after hed settled down again. though
it would probably be simpler to deal with if she did. if somebody thinks theyre
a hedgehog, presumably you just give em a mirror and a few pictures of hedge-
hogs and tell them to sort it out for themselves, come down again when they
feel better. at least medical science could deal with it, thats the point. seems
thats no good enough for fenny, though.
fenny ...?
you know what i got her for christmas?
well, no.
blacks medical dictionary.
nice present.
i thought so. thousands of diseases in it, all in alphabetical order.
you say her name is fenny?
yeah. take your pick, i said. anything in here can be dealt with. the proper
drugs can be prescribed. but no, she has to have something different. just to
make life difficult. she was like that at school, you know.
was she?
she was. fell over playing hockey and broke a bone nobody had ever heard
of.
i can see how that would be irritating, said arthur doubtfully. he was rather
disappointed to discover her name was fenny. it was a rather silly, dispiriting

26

chapter 5.

name, such as an unlovely maiden aunt might vote herself if she couldnt sus-
tain the name fenella properly.
not that i wasnt sympathetic, continued russell, but it did get a bit irri-
tating. she was limping for months.
he slowed down.
this is your turning isnt it?
ah, no, said arthur, five miles further on. if thats all right.
ok, said russell after a very tiny pause to indicate that it wasnt, and
speeded up again.
it was in fact arthurs turning, but he couldnt leave without finding out some-
thing more about this girl who seemed to have taken such a grip on his mind
without even waking up. he could take either of the next two turnings.
they led back to the village that had been his home, though what he would
find there he hesitated to imagine. familiar landmarks had been flitting by,
ghostlike, in the dark, giving rise to the shudders that only very very normal
things can create, when seen where the mind is unprepared for them, and in
an unfamiliar light.
by his own personal time scale, so far as he could estimate it, living as he had
been under the alien rotations of distant suns, it was eight years since he had
left, but what time had passed here he could hardly guess. indeed, what events
had passed were beyond his exhausted comprehension because this planet, his
home, should not be here.
eight years ago, at lunchtime, this planet had been demolished, utterly de-
stroyed, by the huge yellow vogon ships which had hung in the lunchtime sky
as if the law of gravity was no more than a local regulation, and breaking it
no more than a parking offence.
delusions, said russell.
what? said arthur, started out of his train of thought.
she says she suffers from strange delusions that shes living in the real world.
its no good telling her that she is living in the real world because she just says
thats why the delusions are so strange. dont know about you, but i find that
kind of conversation pretty exhausting. give her the tablets and piss off for a
beer is my answer. i mean you can only muck about so much cant you?
arthur frowned, not for the first time.
well ...
and all this dreams and nightmare stuff. and the doctors going on about
strange jumps in her brainwave patterns.
jumps?
this, said fenny.
arthur whirled round in his seat and stared into her suddenly open but ut-

27

terly vacant eyes. whatever she was looking at wasnt in the car. her eyes
fluttered, her head jerked once, and then she was sleeping peacefully.
what did she say? he asked anxiously.
she said this.
this what?
this what? how the heck should i know? this hedgehog, that chimney pot,
the other pair of don alfonsos tweezers. shes barking mad, i thought id
mentioned that.
you dont seem to care very much. arthur tried to say it as matter-of-factly
as possible but it didnt seem to work.
look, buster ...
ok, im sorry. its none of my business. i didnt mean it to sound like that,
said arthur. i know you care a lot, obviously, he added, lying. i know that
you have to deal with it somehow. youll have to excuse me. i just hitched
from the other side of the horsehead nebula.
he stared furiously out of the window.
he was astonished that of all the sensations fighting for room in his head on
this night as he returned to the home that he had thought had vanished into
oblivion for ever, the one that was compelling him was an obsession with this
bizarre girl of whom he knew nothing other than that she had said this to
him, and that he wouldnt wish her brother on a vogon.
so, er, what were the jumps, these jumps you mentioned? he went on to say
as quickly as he could.
look, this is my sister, i dont even know why im talking to you about ...
ok, im sorry. perhaps youd better let me out. this is ...
at the moment he said it, it became impossible, because the storm which had
passed them by suddenly erupted again. lightning belted through the sky, and
someone seemed to be pouring something which closely resembled the atlantic
ocean over them through a sieve.
russell swore and steered intently for a few seconds as the sky blattered at
them. he worked out his anger by rashly accelerating to pass a lorry marked
mckeenas all-weather haulage. the tension eased as the rain subsided.
it started with all that business of the cia agent they found in the reservoir,
when everybody had all the hallucinations and everything, you remember?
arthur wondered for a moment whether to mention again that he had just
hitch-hiked back from the other side of the horsehead nebula and was for this
and various other related and astounding reasons a little out of touch with
recent events, but he decided it would only confuse matters further.
no, he said.
that was the moment she cracked up. she was in a cafe somewhere. rick-

28

chapter 5.

mansworth. dont know what she was doing there, but that was where she
cracked up. apparently she stood up, calmly announced that she had un-
dergone some extraordinary revelation or something, wobbled a bit, looked
confused, and finally collapsed screaming into an egg sandwich.
arthur winced. im very sorry to hear that, he said a little stiffly.
russell made a sort of grumping noise.
so what, said arthur in an attempt to piece things together, was the cia
agent doing in the reservoir?
bobbing up and down of course. he was dead.
but what ...
come on, you remember all that stuff. the hallucinations. everyone said it
was a cock up, the cia trying experiments into drug warfare or something.
some crackpot theory that instead of invading a country it would be much
cheaper and more effective to make everyone think theyd been invaded.
what hallucinations were those exactly ...? said arthur in a rather quiet
voice.
what do you mean, what hallucinations? im talking about all that stuff
with the big yellow ships, everyone going crazy and saying were going to die,
and then pop, they vanished as the effect wore off. the cia denied it which
meant it must be true.
arthurs head went a little swimmy. his hand grabbed at something to steady
himself, and gripped it tightly. his mouth made little opening and closing
movements as if it was on his mind to say something, but nothing emerged.
anyway, continued russell, whatever drug it was it didnt seem to wear off
so fast with fenny. i was all for suing the cia, but a lawyer friend of mine
said it would be like trying to attack a lunatic asylum with a banana, so ...
he shrugged.
the vogon ... squeaked arthur. the yellow ships ... vanished?
well, of course they did, they were hallucinations, said russell, and looked
at arthur oddly. you trying to say you dont remember any of this? where
have you been for heavens sake?
this was, to arthur, such an astonishingly good question that he half-leapt
out of his seat with shock.
christ!!! yelled russell, fighting to control the car which was suddenly try-
ing to skid. he pulled it out of the path of an oncoming lorry and swerved
up on to a grass bank. as the car lurched to a halt, the girl in the back was
thrown against russells seat and collapsed awkwardly.
arthur twisted round in horror.
is she all right? he blurted out.
russell swept his hands angrily back through his blow-dried hair. he tugged

at his blond moustache. he turned to arthur.
would you please, he said, let go of the handbrake?30

chapter 5.



from here it was a four-mile walk to his village: a further mile to the turning,
to which the abominable russell had now fiercely declined to take him, and
from there a further three miles of winding country lane.
the saab seethed off into the night. arthur watched it go, as stunned as a
man might be who, having believed himself to be totally blind for five years,
suddenly discovers that he had merely been wearing too large a hat.
he shook his head sharply in the hope that it might dislodge some salient fact
which would fall into place and make sense of an otherwise utterly bewildering
universe, but since the salient fact, if there was one, entirely failed to do this,
he set off up the road again, hoping that a good vigorous walk, and maybe
even some good painful blisters, would help to reassure him of his own exis-
tence at least, if not his sanity.
it was 10.30 when he arrived, a fact he discovered from the steamed and greasy
window of the horse and groom pub, in which there had hung for many years
a battered old guiness clock which featured a picture of an emu with a pint
glass jammed rather amusingly down its throat.
this was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime during which
first his house and then the entire planet earth had been demolished, or rather
had seemed to be demolished. no, damn it, had been demolished, because if
it hadnt then where the bloody heck had he been for the last eight years, and
how he had got there if not in one of the big yellow vogon ships which the
appalling russell had just been telling him were merely drug- induced hallu-
cinations, and yet if it had been demolished, what was he currently standing
on ...?
he jammed the brake on this line of thought because it wasnt going to get
him any further than it had the last twenty times hed been over it.
he started again.
this was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime during which32

chapter 6.

whatever it was had happened that he was going to sort out later had hap-
pened, and ...
it still didnt make sense.
he started again.
this was the pub in which ...
this was a pub.
pubs served drinks and he couldnt half do with one.
satisfied that his jumbled thought processes had at last arrived at a conclu-
sion, and a conclusion he was happy with, even if it wasnt the one he had set
out to achieve, he strode towards the door.
and stopped.
a small black wire-haired terrier ran out from behind a low wall and then,
catching sight of arthur, began to snarl.
now arthur knew this dog, and he knew it well. it belonged to an advertis-
ing friend of his, and was called know-nothing-bozo because the way its hair
stood up on its head it reminded people of the president of the united states,
and the dog knew arthur, or at least should do. it was a stupid dog, could
not even read an autocue, which way why some people had protested about
its name, but it should at least have been able to recognize arthur instead
of standing there, hackles raised, as if arthur was the most fearful apparition
ever to intrude upon its feeble-witted life.
this prompted arthur to go and peer at the window again, this time with an
eye not for the asphyxiating emu but for himself.
seeing himself for the first time suddenly in a familiar context, he had to admit
that the dog had a point.
he looked a lot like something a farmer would use to scare birds with, and there
was no doubt but that to go into the pub in his present condition would excite
comments of a raucous kind, and worse still, there would doubtless be several
people in there at the moment whom he knew, all of whom would be bound
to bombard him with questions which, at the moment, he felt ill-equipped to
deal with.
will smithers, for instance, the owner of know-nothing-bozo the non-wonder
dog, an animal so stupid that it had been sacked from one of wills own com-
mercials for being incapable of knowing which dog food it was supposed to
prefer, despite the fact that the meat in all the other bowls had had engine oil
poured over it.
will would definitely be in there. here was his dog, here was his car, a grey
porsche 928s with a sign in the back window which read, my other car is also
a porsche. damn him.
he stared at it and realized that he had just learned something he hadnt

33

known before.
will smithers, like most of the overpaid and under-scrupulous bastards arthur
knew in advertising made a point of changing his car every august so that he
could tell people his accountant made him do it, though the truth was that his
accountant was trying like hell to stop him, what with all the alimony he had
to pay, and so on - and this was the same car arthur remembered him having
before. the number plate proclaimed its year.
given that it was now winter, and that the event which had caused arthur so
much trouble eight of his personal years ago had occurred at the beginning of
september, less than six or seven months could have passed here.
he stood terribly still for a moment and let know-nothing-bozo jump up and
down yapping at him. he was suddenly stunned by a realization he could no
longer avoid, which was this: he was now an alien on his own world. try as he
might, no one was even to be able to believe his story. not only did it sound
perfectly potty, but it was flatly contradicted by the simplest observable facts.
was this really the earth? was there the slightest possibility that he had
made some extraordinary mistake?
the pub in front of him was unbearably familiar to him in every detail - every
brick, every piece of peeling paint; and inside he could sense its familiar stuffy,
noisy warmth, its exposed beams, its unauthentic cast-iron light fittings, its
bar sticky with beer that people he knew had put their elbows in, overlooked
by cardboard cutouts of girls with packets of peanuts stapled all over their
breasts. it was all the stuff of his home, his world.
he even knew this blasted dog.
hey, know-nothing!
the sound of will smithers voice meant he had to decide what do to quickly.
if he stood his ground he would be discovered and the whole circus would
begin. to hide would only postpone the moment, and it was bitterly cold now.
the fact that it was will made the choice easier. it wasnt that arthur dis-
liked him as such - will was quite fun. it was just that he was fun in such an
exhausting way because, being in advertising, he always wanted you to know
how much fun he was having and where he had got his jacket from.
mindful of this, arthur hid behind a van.
hey, know-nothing, whats up?
the door opened and will came out, wearing a leather flying jacket that hed
got a mate of his at the road research laboratory to crash a car into spe-
cially, in order to get that battered look. know-nothing yelped with delight
and, having got the attention it wanted, was happy to forget arthur.
will was with some friends, and they had a game they played with the dog.
commies! they all shouted at the dog in chorus. commies, commies, com-

34

chapter 6.

mies!!!
the dog went berserk with barking, prancing up and down, yapping its little
heart out, beside itself in transports of ecstatic rage. they all laughed and
cheered it on, then gradually dispersed to their various cars and disappeared
into the night.
well that clears one thing up, thought arthur from behind the van, this is
quite definitely the planet i remember.



his house was still there.
how or why, he had no idea. he had decided to go and have a look while he
was waiting for the pub to empty, so that he could go and ask the landlord for
a bed for the night when everyone else had gone. and there it was.
he hurriedly let himself in with the key he kept under a stone frog in the
garden, because, astoundingly, the phone was ringing.
he had heard it faintly all the way up the lane and had started to run as soon
as he realized where the sound was coming from.
the door had to be forced open because of the astonishing accumulation of
junk mail on the doormat.
it jammed itself stuck on what he would later
discover were fourteen identical, personally addressed invitations to apply for
a credit card he already had, seventeen identical threatening letters for non-
payment of bills on a credit card he didnt have, thirty-three identical letters
saying that he personally had been specially selected as a man of taste and
discrimination who knew what he wanted and where he was going in todays
sophisticated jet- setting world and would he therefore like to buy some grotty
wallet, and also a dead tabby kitten.
he rammed himself through the relatively narrow opening afforded by all this,
stumbled through a pile of wine offers that no discriminating connoisseur would
want to miss, slithered over a heap of beach villa holidays, blundered up the
dark stairs to his bedroom and got to the phone just as it stopped ringing.
he collapsed, panting, on to his cold, musty-smelling bed and for a few minutes
stopped trying to prevent the world from spinning round his head in the way
it obviously wanted to.
when it had enjoyed its little spin and had calmed down a bit, arthur reached
out for the bedside light, not expecting it to come on. to his surprise it did.
this appealed to arthurs sense of logic. since the electricity board cut him
off without fail every time he paid his bill, it seemed only reasonable that they36

chapter 7.

should leave him connected when he didnt. sending them money obviously
only drew attention to yourself.
the room was much as he had left it, i.e. festeringly untidy, though the effect
was muted a little by a thick layer of dust. half-read books and magazines nes-
tled amongst piles of half-used towels. half pairs of socks reclined in half-drunk
cups of coffee. what was once a half-eaten sandwich had now half-turned into
something that arthur entirely didnt want to know about. bung a fork of
lightning through this lot, he thought to himself, and youd start the evolution
of life all over again.
there was only one thing in the room that was different.
for a moment or so he couldnt see what the one thing that was different was,
because it too was covered in a film of disgusting dust. then his eyes caught
it and stopped.
it was next to a battered old television on which it was only possible to watch
open university study courses, because if it tried to show anything more ex-
citing it would break down.
it was a box.
arthur pushed himself up on his elbows and peered at it.
it was a grey box, with a kind of dull lustre to it. it was a cubic grey box,
just over a foot on a side. it was tied with a single grey ribbon, knotted into
a neat bow on the top.
he got up, walked over and touched it in surprise. whatever it was was clearly
gift-wrapped, neatly and beautifully, and was waiting for him to open it.
cautiously, he picked it up and carried it back to the bed. he brushed the
dust off the top and loosened the ribbon. the top of the box was a lid, with
a flap tucked into the body of the box.
he untucked it and looked into the box. in it was a glass globe, nestling in fine
grey tissue paper. he drew it out, carefully. it wasnt a proper globe because
it was open at the bottom, or, as arthur realized turning it over, at the top,
with a thick rim. it was a bowl. a fish bowl.
it was made of the most wonderful glass perfectly transparent, yet with an ex-
traordinary silver-grey quality as if crystal and slate had gone into its making.
arthur slowly turned it over and over in his hands. it was one of the most
beautiful objects he had ever seen, but he was entirely perplexed by it. he
looked into the box, but other than the tissue paper there was nothing. on
the outside of the box there was nothing.
he turned the bowl round again. it was wonderful. it was exquisite. but it
was a fish bowl.
he tapped it with his thumbnail and it rang with a deep and glorious chime
which was sustained for longer than seemed possible, and when at last it faded

37

seemed not to die away but to drift off into other worlds, as into a deep sea
dream.
entranced, arthur turned it round yet again, and this time the light from the
dusty little bedside lamp caught it at a different angle and glittered on some
fine abrasions on the fish bowls surface. he held it up, adjusting the angle to
the light, and suddenly saw clearly the finely engraved shapes of words shad-
owed on the glass.
so long, they said, and thanks ...
and that was all. he blinked, and understood nothing.
for fully five more minutes he turned the object round and around, held it to
the light at different angles, tapped it for its mesmerizing chime and pondered
on the meaning of the shadowy letters but could find none. finally he stood
up, filled the bowl with water from the tap and put it back on the table next
to the television. he shook the little babel fish from his ear and dropped
it, wriggling, into the bowl. he wouldnt be needing it any more, except for
watching foreign movies.
he returned to lie on his bed, and turned out the light.
he lay still and quiet. he absorbed the enveloping darkness, slowly relaxed his
limbs from end to end, eased and regulated his breathing, gradually cleared his
mind of all thought, closed his eyes and was completely incapable of getting
to sleep.
the night was uneasy with rain. the rain clouds themselves had now moved
on and were currently concentrating their attention on a small transport cafe
just outside bournemouth, but the sky through which they had passed had
been disturbed by them and now wore a damply ruffled air, as if it didnt
know what else it might not do it further provoked.
the moon was out in a watery way. it looked like a ball of paper from the back
pocket of jeans that have just come out of the washing machine, and which
only time and ironing would tell if it was an old shopping list or a five pound
note.
the wind flicked about a little, like the tail of a horse thats trying to decide
what sort of mood its in tonight, and a bell somewhere chimed midnight.
a skylight creaked open.
it was stiff and had to be jiggled and persuaded a little because the frame was
slightly rotten and the hinges had at some time in its life been rather sensibly
painted over, but eventually it was open.
a strut was found to prop it and a figure struggled out into the narrow gully
between the opposing pitches of the roof.
it stood and watched the sky in silence.
the figure was completely unrecognizable as the wild-looking creature who

38

chapter 7.

had burst crazily into the cottage a little over an hour ago. gone was the
ragged threadbare dressing gown, smeared with the mud of a hundred worlds,
stained with junk food condiment from a hundred grimy spaceports, gone was
the tangled mane of hair, gone the long and knotted beard, flourishing ecosys-
tem and all.
instead, there was arthur dent the smooth and casual, in corduroys and a
chunky sweater. his hair was cropped and washed, his chin clean shaven.
only the eyes still said that whatever it was the universe thought it was doing
to him, he would still like it please to stop.
they were not the same eyes with which he had last looked out at this partic-
ular scene, and the brain which interpreted the images the eyes resolved was
not the same brain. there had been no surgery involved, just the continual
wrenching of experience.
the night seemed like an alive thing to him at this moment, the dark earth
around him a being in which he was rooted.
he could feel like a tingle on distant nerve ends the flood of a far river, the
roll of invisible hills, the knot of heavy rainclouds parked somewhere away to
the south.
he could sense, too, the thrill of being a tree, which was something he hadnt
expected. he knew that it felt good to curl your toes in the earth, but hed
never realized it could feel quite as good as that. he could sense an almost un-
seemly wave of pleasure reaching out to him all the way from the new forest.
he must try this summer, he thought, and see what having leaves felt like.
from another direction he felt the sensation of being a sheep startled by a
flying saucer, but it was virtually indistinguishable from the feeling of being
a sheep startled by anything else it ever encountered, for they were creatures
who learned very little on their journey through life, and would be startled to
see the sun rising in the morning, and astonished by all the green stuff in the
fields.
he was surprised to find he could feel the sheep being startled by the sun that
morning, and the morning before, and being startled by a clump of trees the
day before that. he could go further and further back, but it got dull because
all it consisted of was sheep being startled by things theyd been startled by
the day before.
he left the sheep and let his mind drift outwards sleepily in developing ripples.
it felt the presence of other minds, hundreds of them, thousands in a web,
some sleepy, some sleeping, some terribly excited, one fractured.
one fractured.
he passed it fleetingly and tried to feel for it again, but it eluded him like
the other card with an apple on it in pelmanism. he felt a spasm of excite-

39

ment because he knew instinctively who it was, or at least knew who it was he
wanted it to be, and once you know what it is you want to be true, instinct is
a very useful device for enabling you to know that it is.
he instinctively knew that it was fenny and that he wanted to find her; but
he could not. by straining too much for it, he could feel he was losing this
strange new faculty, so he relaxed the search and let his mind wander more
easily once more.
and again, he felt the fracture.
again he couldnt find it. this time, whatever his instinct was busy telling
him it was all right to believe, he wasnt certain that it was fenny - or perhaps
it was a different fracture this time. it had the same disjointed quality but it
seemed a more general feeling of fracture, deeper, not a single mind, maybe
not a mind at all. it was different.
he let his mind sink slowly and widely into the earth, rippling, seeping, sink-
ing.
he was following the earth through its days, drifting with the rhythms of
its myriad pulses, seeping through the webs of its life, swelling with its tides,
turning with its weight. always the fracture kept returning, a dull disjointed
distant ache.
and now he was flying through a land of light; the light was time, the tides of
it were days receding. the fracture he had sensed, the second fracture, lay in
the distance before him across the land, the thickness of a single hair across
the dreaming landscape of the days of earth.
and suddenly he was upon it.
he danced dizzily over the edge as the dreamland dropped sheer away beneath
him, a stupefying precipice into nothing, him wildly twisting, clawing at noth-
ing, flailing in horrifying space, spinning, falling.
across the jagged chasm had been another land, another time, an older world,
not fractured from, but hardly joined: two earths. he woke.
a cold breeze brushed the feverish sweat standing on his forehead. the night-
mare was spent and so, he felt, was he. his shoulders dropped, he gently
rubbed his eyes with the tips of his fingers. at last he was sleepy as well as
very tired. as to what it meant, if it meant anything at all, he would think
about it in the morning; for now he would go to bed and sleep. his own bed,
his own sleep.
he could see his house in the distance and wondered why this was.
it was
silhouetted against the moonlight and he recognized its rather dull blockish
shape. he looked about him and noticed that he was about eighteen inches
above the rose bushes of one of his neighbours, john ainsworth. his rose
bushes were carefully tended, pruned back for the winter, strapped to canes

40

chapter 7.

and labelled, and arthur wondered what he was doing above them. he won-
dered what was holding him there, and when he discovered that nothing was
holding him there he crashed awkwardly to the ground.
he picked himself up, brushed himself down and hobbled back to his house on
a sprained ankle. he undressed and toppled into bed.
while he was asleep the phone rang again. it rang for fully fifteen minutes and
caused him to turn over twice. it never, however, stood a chance of waking
him up.



arthur awoke feeling wonderful, absolutely fabulous, refreshed, overjoyed to
be home, bouncing with energy, hardly disappointed at all to discover it was
the middle of february.
he almost danced to the fridge, found the three least hairy things in it, put
them on a plate and watched them intently for two minutes. since they made
no attempt to move within that time he called them breakfast and ate them.
between them they killed a virulent space disease hes picked up without know-
ing it in the flargathon gas swamps a few days earlier, which otherwise would
have killed off half the population of the western hemisphere, blinded the
other half and driven everyone else psychotic and sterile, so the earth was
lucky there.
he felt strong, he felt healthy. he vigorously cleared away the junk mail with
a spade and then buried the cat.
just as he was finishing that, the phone went, but he let it ring while he main-
tained a moments respectful silence. whoever it was would ring back if it was
important.
he kicked the mud off his shoes and went back inside.
there had been a small number of significant letters in the piles of junk - some
documents from the council, dated three years earlier, relating to the proposed
demolition of his house, and some other letters about the setting up of a public
inquiry into the whole bypass scheme in the area; there was also an old letter
from greenpeace, the ecological pressure group to which he occasionally made
contributions, asking for help with their scheme to release dolphins and orcas
from captivity, and some postcards from friends, vaguely complaining that he
never got in touch these days.
he collected these together and put them in a cardboard file which he marked
things to do. since he was feeling so vigorous and dynamic that morning,
he even added the word urgent!42

chapter 8.

he unpacked his towel and another few odd bits and pieces from the plastic
bag he had acquired at the port brasta mega-market. the slogan on the
side was a clever and elaborate pun in lingua centauri which was completely
incomprehensible in any other language and therefore entirely pointless for a
duty free shop at a spaceport. the bag also had a hole in it so he threw it
away.
he realized with a sudden twinge that something else must have dropped out
in the small spacecraft that had brought him to earth, kindly going out of its
way to drop him right beside the a303. he had lost his battered and spaceworn
copy of the thing which had helped him find his way across the unbelievable
wastes of space he had traversed. he had lost the hitch hikers guide to the
galaxy.
well, he told himself, this time i really wont be needing it again.
he had some calls to make.
he had decided how to deal with the mass of contradictions his return journey
precipitated, which was that he would simply brazen it out.
he phoned the bbc and asked to be put through to his department head.
oh, hello, arthur dent here. look, sorry i havent been in for six months
but ive gone mad.
oh, not to worry. thought it was probably something like that. happens
here all the time. how soon can we expect you?
when do hedgehogs stop hibernating?
sometime in spring i think.
ill be in shortly after that.
rightyho.
he flipped through the yellow pages and made a short list of numbers to try.
oh hello, is that the old elms hospital? yes, i was just phoning to see if i
could have a word with fenella, er ... fenella - good lord, silly me, ill forget
my own name next, er, fenella - isnt this ridiculous? patient of yours, dark
haired girl, came in last night ...
im afraid we dont have any patients called fenella.
oh, dont you? i mean fiona of course, we just call her fen ...
im sorry, goodbye.
click.
six conversations along these lines began to take their toll on his mood of vig-
orous, dynamic optimism, and he decided that before it deserted him entirely
he would take it down to the pub and parade it a little.
he had had the perfect idea for explaining away every inexplicable weirdness
about himself at a stroke, and he whistled to himself as he pushed open the
door which had so daunted him last night.

arthur!!!!
he grinned cheerfully at the boggling eyes that stared at him from all corners
of the pub, and told them all what a wonderful time hed had in southern
california.44

chapter 8.



he accepted another pint and took a pull at it.
of course, i had my own personal alchemist too.
you what?
he was getting silly and he knew it. exuberance and hall and woodhouse
best bitter was a mixture to be wary of, but one of the first effects it had is
to stop you being wary of things, and the point at which arthur should have
stopped and explained no more was the point at which he started instead to
get inventive.
oh yes, he insisted with a happy glazed smile. its why ive lost so much
weight.
what? said his audience.
oh yes, he said again. the californians have rediscovered alchemy. oh
yes.
he smiled again.
only, he said, its in a much more useful form than that which in ... he
paused thoughtfully to let a little grammar assemble in his head. in which
the ancients used to practise it. or at least, he added, failed to practise it.
they couldnt get it to work you know. nostradamus and that lot. couldnt
cut it.
nostradamus? said one of his audience.
i didnt think he was an alchemist, said another.
i thought, said a third, he was a seer.
he became a seer, said arthur to his audience, the component parts of which
were beginning to bob and blur a little, because he was such a lousy alchemist.
you should know that.
he took another pull at his beer. it was something he had not tasted for eight
years. he tasted it and tasted it.
what has alchemy got to do, asked a bit of the audience, with losing46

chapter 9.

weight?
im glad you asked that, said arthur. very glad. and i will now tell you
what the connection is between ... he paused. between those two things.
the things you mentioned. ill tell you.
he paused and manoeuvred his thoughts. it was like watching oil tankers do-
ing three-point turns in the english channel.
theyve discovered how to turn excess body fat into gold, he said, in a sud-
den blur of coherence.
youre kidding.
oh yes, he said, no, he corrected himself, they have.
he rounded on the doubting part of his audience, which was all of it, and so
it took a little while to round on it completely.
have you been to california? he demanded. do you know the sort of stuff
they do there?
three members of his audience said they had and that he was talking non-
sense.
you havent seen anything, insisted arthur. oh yes, he added, because
someone was offering to buy another round.
the evidence, he said, pointing at himself, and not missing by more than a
couple of inches, is before your eyes. fourteen hours in a trance, he said,
in a tank. in a trance. i was in a tank. i think, he added after a thoughtful
pause, i already said that.
he waited patiently while the next round was duly distributed. he composed
the next bit of his story in his mind, which was going to be something about
the tank needing to be orientated along a line dropped perpendicularly from
the pole star to a baseline drawn between mars and venus, and was about to
start trying to say it when he decided to give it a miss.
long time, he said instead, in a tank.
severely at his audience, to make sure it was all following attentively.
he resumed.
where was i? he said.
in a trance, said one.
in a tank, said another.
oh yes, said arthur. thank you. and slowly, he said pressing onwards,
slowly, slowly slowly, all your excess body fat ... turns ... to ... he paused
for effect, subcoo ... subyoo ... subtoocay ... - he paused for breath - sub-
cutaneous gold, which you can have surgically removed. getting out of the
tank is hell. what did you say?
i was just clearing my throat.
i think you doubt me.

in a trance. he looked round

47

i was clearing my throat.
she was clearing her throat, confirmed a significant part of the audience in
a low rumble.
oh yes, said arthur, all right. and you then split the proceeds ... he
paused again for a maths break, fifty-fifty with the alchemist. make a lot of
money!
he looked swayingly around at his audience, and could not help but be aware
of an air of scepticism about their jumbled faces.
he felt very affronted by this.
how else, he demanded, could i afford to have my face dropped?
friendly arms began to help him home. listen, he protested, as the cold
february breeze brushed his face, looking lived-in is all the rage in california
at the moment. youve got to look as if youve seen the galaxy. life, i mean.
youve got to look as if youve seen life. thats what i got. a face drop. give
me eight years, i said. i hope being thirty doesnt come back into fashion or
ive wasted a lot of money.
he lapsed into silence for a while as the friendly arms continued to help him
along the lane to his house.
got in yesterday, he mumbled. im very happy to be home. or somewhere
very like it ...
jet lag, muttered one of his friends. long trip from california. really
mucks you up for a couple of days.
i dont think hes been there at all, muttered another. i wonder where he
has been. and whats happened to him.
after a little sleep arthur got up and pottered round the house a bit. he felt
woozy and a little low, still disoriented by the journey. he wondered how he
was going to find fenny.
he sat and looked at the fish bowl. he tapped it again, and despite being
full of water and a small yellow babel fish which was gulping its way around
rather dejectedly, it still chimed its deep and resonant chime as clearly and
mesmerically as before.
someone is trying to thank me, he thought to himself. he wondered who, and
for what.

48

chapter 9.



at the third stroke it will be one ... thirty-two ... and twenty seconds.
beep ... beep ... beep.
ford prefect suppressed a little giggle of evil satisfaction, realized that he had
no reason to suppress it, and laughed out loud, a wicked laugh.
he switched the incoming signal through from the sub-etha net to the ships
hi-fi system, and the odd, rather stilted, sing-song voice spoke out with re-
markable clarity round the cabin.
at the third stroke it will be one ... thirty-two ... and thirty seconds.
beep ... beep ... beep.
he tweaked the volume up just a little while keeping a careful eye on a rapidly
changing table of figures on the ships computer display. for the length of
time he had in mind, the question of power consumption became significant.
he didnt want a murder on his conscience.
at the third stroke it will be one ... thirty-two ... and forty seconds.
beep ... beep ... beep.
he checked around the small ship. he walked down the short corridor. at
the third stroke ...
he stuck his head into the small, functional, gleaming steel bathroom.
it will be ...
it sounded fine in there.
he looked into the tiny sleeping quarters.
... one ... thirty-two ...
it sounded a bit muffled. there was a towel hanging over one of the speakers.
he took down the towel.
... and fifty seconds.
fine.
he checked out the packed cargo hold, and wasnt at all satisfied with the
sound. there was altogether too much crated junk in the way. he stepped50

chapter 10.

back out and waited for the door to seal. he broke open a closed control panel
and pushed the jettison button. he didnt know why he hadnt thought of
that before. a whooshing rumbling noise died away quickly into silence. after
a pause a slight hiss could be heard again.
it stopped.
he waited for the green light to show and then opened the door again on the
now empty cargo hold.
... one ... thirty-three ... and fifty seconds.
very nice.
beep ... beep ... beep.
he then went and had a last thorough examination of the emergency suspended
animation chamber, which was where he particularly wanted it to be heard.
at the third stroke it will be one ... thirty ... four ... precisely.
he shivered as he peered down through the heavily frosted covering at the dim
bulk of the form within. one day, who knew when, it would wake, and when
it did, it would know what time it was. not exactly local time, true, but what
the heck.
he double-checked the computer display above the freezer bed, dimmed the
lights and checked it again.
at the third stroke it will be ...
he tiptoed out and returned to the control cabin.
... one ... thirty-four and twenty seconds.
the voice sounded as clear as if he was hearing it over a phone in london,
which he wasnt, not by a long way.
he gazed out into the inky night. the star the size of a brilliant biscuit crumb
he could see in the distance was zondostina, or as it was known on the world
from which the rather stilted, sing-song voice was being received, pleiades
zeta.
the bright orange curve that filled over half the visible area was the giant gas
planet sesefras magna, where the xaxisian battleships docked, and just rising
over its horizon was a small cool blue moon, epun.
at the third stroke it will be ...
for twenty minutes he sat and watched as the gap between the ship and epun
closed, as the ships computer teased and kneaded the numbers that would
bring it into a loop around the little moon, close the loop and keep it there,
orbiting in perpetual obscurity.
one ... fifty-nine ...
his original plan had been to close down all external signalling and radiation
from the ship, to render it as nearly invisible as possible unless you were ac-
tually looking at it, but then hed had an idea he preferred.
it would now

51

emit one single continuous beam, pencil-thin, broadcasting the incoming time
signal to the planet of the signals origin, which it would not reach for four
hundred years, travelling at light speed, but where it would probably cause
something of a stir when it did.
beep ... beep ... beep.
he sniggered.
he didnt like to think of himself as the sort of person who giggled or snig-
gered, but he had to admit that he had been giggling and sniggering almost
continuously for well over half an hour now.
at the third stroke ...
the ship was now locked almost perfectly into its perpetual orbit round a little
known and never visited moon. almost perfect.
one thing only remained. he ran again the computer simulation of the launch-
ing of the ships little escape-o-buggy, balancing actions, reactions, tangential
forces, all the mathematical poetry of motion, and saw that it was good.
before he left, he turned out the lights.
as his tiny little cigar tube of an escape craft zipped out on the beginning of
its three-day journey to the orbiting space station port sesefron, it rode for a
few seconds a long pencil- thin beam of radiation that was starting out on a
longer journey still.
at the third stroke, it will be two ... thirteen ... and fifty seconds.
he giggled and sniggered. he would have laughed out loud but he didnt have
the room.
beep ... beep ... beep.

52

chapter 10.



april showers i hate especially.
however noncommittally arthur grunted, the man seemed determined to talk
to him. he wondered if he should get up and move to another table, but there
didnt seem to be one free in the whole cafeteria. he stirred his coffee fiercely.
bloody april showers. hate hate hate.
arthur stared, frowning, out of the window. a light, sunny spray of rain hung
over the motorway. two months hed been back now. slipping back into his
old life had in fact been laughably easy. people had such extraordinarily short
memories, including him. eight years of crazed wanderings round the galaxy
now seemed to him not so much like a bad dream as like a film he had video-
taped from the tv and now kept in the back of a cupboard without bothering
to watch.
one effect that still lingered though, was his joy at being back. now that the
earths atmosphere had closed over his head for good, he thought, wrongly,
everything within it gave him extraordinary pleasure. looking at the silvery
sparkle of the raindrops he felt he had to protest.
well, i like them, he said suddenly, and for all the obvious reasons. theyre
light and refreshing. they sparkle and make you feel good.
the man snorted derisively.
thats what they all say, he said, and glowered darkly from his corner seat.
he was a lorry driver. arthur knew this because his opening, unprovoked re-
mark had been, im a lorry driver. i hate driving in the rain. ironic isnt it?
bloody ironic.
if there was a sequitur hidden in this remark, arthur had not been able to
divine it and had merely given a little grunt, affable but not encouraging.
but the man had not been deterred then, and was not deterred now. they
all say that about bloody april showers, he said. so bloody nice, so bloody
refreshing, such charming bloody weather.54

chapter 11.

he leaned forward, screwing his face up as if he was going to say something
about the government.
what i want to know is this, he said, if its going to be nice weather, why,
he almost spat, cant it be nice without bloody raining?
arthur gave up. he decided to leave his coffee, which was too hot to drink
quickly and too nasty to drink cold.
well, there you go, he said and instead got up himself. bye.
he stopped off at the service station shop, then walked back through the car
park, making a point of enjoying the fine play of rain on his face. there was
even, he noticed, a faint rainbow glistening over the devon hills. he enjoyed
that too.
he climbed into his battered but adored old black golf gti, squealed the tyres,
and headed out past the islands of petrol pumps and on to the slip road back
towards the motorway.
he was wrong in thinking that the atmosphere of the earth had closed finally
and for ever above his head.
he was wrong to think that it would ever be possible to put behind him the
tangled web of irresolutions into which his galactic travels had dragged him.
he was wrong to think he could now forget that the big, hard, oily, dirty,
rainbow-hung earth on which he lived was a microscopic dot on a microscopic
dot lost in the unimaginable infinity of the universe.
he drove on, humming, being wrong about all these things.
the reason he was wrong was standing by the slip road under a small umbrella.
his jaw sagged. he sprained his ankle against the brake pedal and skidded so
hard he very nearly turned the car over.
fenny! he shouted.
having narrowly avoided hitting her with the actual car, he hit her instead
with the car door as he leant across and flung it open at her.
it caught her hand and knocked away her umbrella, which then bowled wildly
away across the road.
shit! yelled arthur as helpfully as he cold, leapt out of his own door,
narrowly avoided being run down by mckeenas all- weather haulage, and
watched in horror as it ran down fennys umbrella instead. the lorry swept
along the motorway and away.
the umbrella lay like a recently swatted daddy-long-legs, expiring sadly on the
ground. tiny gusts of wind made it twitch a little.
he picked it up.
er, he said. there didnt seem to be a lot of point in offering the thing back
to her.
how did you know my name? she said.

55

er, well, he said. look, ill get you another one ...
he looked at her and tailed off.
she was tallish with dark hair which fell in waves around a pale and serious
face. standing still, alone, she seemed almost sombre, like a statue to some
important but unpopular virtue in a formal garden. she seemed to be looking
at something other than what she looked as if she was looking at.
but when she smiled, as she did now, it was as if she suddenly arrived from
somewhere. warmth and life flooded into her face, and impossibly graceful
movement into her body. the effect was very disconcerting, and it discon-
certed arthur like hell.
she grinned, tossed her bag into the back and swivelled herself into the front
seat.
dont worry about the umbrella, she said to him as she climbed in. it was
my brothers and he cant have liked it or he wouldnt have given it to me.
she laughed and pulled on her seatbelt. youre not a friend of my brothers
are you?
no.
her voice was the only part of her which didnt say good.
her physical presence there in the car, his car, was quite extraordinary to
arthur. he felt, as he let the car pull slowly away, that he could hardly think
or breathe, and hoped that neither of these functions were vital to his driving
or they were in trouble.
so what he had experienced in the other car, her brothers car, the night he
had returned exhausted and bewildered from his nightmare years in the stars
had not been the unbalance of the moment, or, if it had been, he was at least
twice as unbalanced now, and quite liable to fall off whatever it is that well-
balanced people are supposed to be balancing on.
so ... he said, hoping to kick the conversation off to an exciting start.
he was meant to pick me up - my brother - but phoned to say he couldnt
make it.
i asked about buses but the man started to look at the calendar
rather than a timetable, so i decided to hitch. so.
so.
so here i am. and what i would like to know, is how you know my name.
perhaps we ought to first sort out, said arthur, looking back over his shoul-
der as he eased his car into the motorway traffic, where im taking you.
very close, he hoped, or long away. close would mean she lived near him, a
long way would mean he could drive her there.
id like to go to taunton, she said, please. if thats all right. its not far.
you can drop me at ...
you live in taunton? he said, hoping that hed managed to sound merely

56

chapter 11.

curious rather than ecstatic. taunton was wonderfully close to him. he could
...
no, london, she said. theres a train in just under an hour.
it was the worst thing possible. taunton was only minutes away up the motor-
way. he wondered what to do, and while he was wondering with horror heard
himself saying, oh, i can take you to london. let me take you to london
...
bungling idiot. why on earth had he said let in that stupid way? he was
behaving like a twelve-year-old.
are you going to london? she asked.
i wasnt, he said, but ... bungling idiot.
its very kind of you, she said, but really no. i like to go by train. and
suddenly she was gone. or rather, that part of her which brought her to life
was gone. she looked rather distantly out of the window and hummed lightly
to herself.
he couldnt believe it.
thirty seconds into the conversation, and already hed blown it.
grown men, he told himself, in flat contradiction of centuries of accumulated
evidence about the way grown men behave, do not behave like this.
taunton 5 miles, said the signpost.
he gripped the steering wheel so tightly the car wobbled. he was going to
have to do something dramatic.
fenny, he said.
she glanced round sharply at him.
you still havent told me how ...
listen, said arthur, i will tell you, though the story is rather strange. very
strange.
she was still looking at him, but said nothing.
listen ...
you said that.
did i? oh. there are things i must talk to you about, and things i must
tell you ... a story i must tell you which would ... he was thrashing about.
he wanted something along the lines of thy knotted and combined locks to
part, and each particular quill to stand on end like quills upon the fretful por-
pentine but didnt think he could carry it off and didnt like the hedgehog
reference.
... which would take more than five miles, he settled for in the end, rather
lamely he was afraid.
well ...
just supposing, he said, just supposing - he didnt know what was com-

57

ing next, so he thought hed just sit back and listen - that there was some
extraordinary way in which you were very important to me, and that, though
you didnt know it, i was very important to you, but it all went for nothing
because we only had five miles and i was a stupid idiot at knowing how to say
something very important to someone ive only just met and not crash into
lorries at the same time, what would you say ... he paused helplessly, and
looked at her, i ... should do?
watch the road! she yelped.
shit!
he narrowly avoided careering into the side of a hundred italian washing ma-
chines in a german lorry.
i think, she said, with a momentary sigh of relief, you should buy me a
drink before my train goes.

58

chapter 11.



there is, for some reason, something especially grim about pubs near stations,
a very particular kind of grubbiness, a special kind of pallor to the pork pies.
worse than the pork pies, though, are the sandwiches.
there is a feeling which persists in england that making a sandwich inter-
esting, attractive, or in any way pleasant to eat is something sinful that only
foreigners do.
make em dry, is the instruction buried somewhere in the collective national
consciousness, make em rubbery. if you have to keep the buggers fresh, do
it by washing em once a week.
it is by eating sandwiches in pubs on saturday lunchtimes that the british seek
to atone for whatever their national sins have been. theyre not altogether
clear what those sins are, and dont want to know either. sins are not the
sort of things one wants to know about. but whatever their sins are they are
amply atoned for by the sandwiches they make themselves eat.
if there is anything worse than the sandwiches, it is the sausages which sit
next to them. joyless tubes, full of gristle, floating in a sea of something hot
and sad, stuck with a plastic pin in the shape of a chefs hat: a memorial, one
feels, for some chef who hated the world, and died, forgotten and alone among
his cats on a back stair in stepney.
the sausages are for the ones who know what their sins are and wish to atone
for something specific.
there must be somewhere better, said arthur.
no time, said fenny, glancing at her watch. my train leaves in half an
hour.
they sat at a small wobbly table. on it were some dirty glasses, and some
soggy beermats with jokes printed on them. arthur got fenny a tomato juice,
and himself a pint of yellow water with gas in it. and a couple of sausages. he
didnt know why. he bought them for something to do while the gas settled60

chapter 12.

in his glass.
the barman dunked arthurs change in a pool of beer on the bar, for which
arthur thanked him.
all right, said fenny, glancing at her watch, tell me what it is you have to
tell me.
she sounded, as well she might, extremely sceptical, and arthurs heart sank.
hardly, he felt, the most conductive setting to try to explain to her as she sat
there, suddenly cool and defensive, that in a sort of out-of-body dream he had
had a telepathic sense that the mental breakdown she had suffered had been
connected with the fact that, appearances to the contrary nonwithstanding,
the earth had been demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass,
something which he alone on earth knew anything about, having virtually
witnessed it from a vogon spaceship, and that furthermore both his body and
soul ached for her unbearably and he needed to got to bed with her as soon
as was humanly possible.
fenny, he started.
i wonder if youd like to buy some tickets for our raffle? its just a little one.
he glanced up sharply.
to raise money for anjie whos retiring.
what?
and needs a kidney machine.
he was being leant over by a rather stiffly slim middle-aged woman with a
prim knitted suit and a prim little perm, and a prim little smile that probably
got licked by prim little dogs a lot.
she was holding out a small book of cloakroom tickets and a collecting tin.
only ten pence each, she said, so you could probably even buy two. with-
out breaking the bank! she gave a tinkly little laugh and then a curiously
long sigh. saying without breaking the bank had obviously given her more
pleasure than anything since some gis had been billeted on her in the war.
er, yes, all right, said arthur, hurriedly digging in his pocket and producing
a couple of coins.
with infuriating slowness, and prim theatricality, if there was such a thing,
the woman tore off two tickets and handed them to arthur.
i do hope you win, she said with a smile that suddenly snapped together
like a piece of advanced origami, the prizes are so nice.
yes, thank you, said arthur, pocketing the tickets rather brusquely and
glancing at his watch.
he turned towards fenny.
so did the woman with the raffle tickets.
and what about you, young lady? she said. its for anjies kidney ma-

61

chine. shes retiring you see. yes? she hoisted the little smile even further
up her face. she would have to stop and let it go soon or the skin would surely
split.
er, look, here you are, said arthur, and pushed a fifty pence piece at her in
the hope that that would see her off.
oh, we are in the money, arent we? said the woman, with a long smiling
sigh. down from london are we?
no, thats all right, really, he said with a wave of his hand, and she started
with an awful deliberation to peel off five tickets, one by one.
oh, but you must have your tickets, insisted the woman, or you wont be
able to claim your prize. theyre very nice prizes, you know. very suitable.
arthur snatched the tickets, and said thank you as sharply as he could.
the woman turned to fenny once again.
and now, what about ...
no! arthur nearly yelled. these are for her, he explained, brandishing
the five new tickets.
oh, i see! how nice!
she smiled sickeningly at both of them.
well, i do hope you ...
yes, snapped arthur, thank you.
the woman finally departed to the table next to theirs. arthur turned des-
perately to fenny, and was relieved to see that she was rocking with silent
laughter.
he sighed and smiled.
where were we?
you were calling me fenny, and i was about to ask you not to.
what do you mean?
she twirled the little wooden cocktail stick in her tomato juice.
its why i asked if you were a friend of my brothers. or half- brother really.
hes the only one who calls me fenny, and im not fond of him for it.
so whats ...?
fenchurch.
what?
fenchurch.
fenchurch.
she looked at him sternly.
yes, she said, and im watching you like a lynx to see if youre going to ask
the same silly question that everybody asks me until i want to scream. i shall
be cross and disappointed if you do. plus i shall scream. so watch it.
she smiled, shook her hair a little forward over her face and peered at him

62

chapter 12.

from behind it.
oh, he said, thats a little unfair, isnt it?
yes.
fine.
all right, she said with a laugh, you can ask me. might as well get it over
with. better than have you call me fenny all the time.
presumably ... said arthur.
weve only got two tickets left, you see, and since you were so generous when
i spoke to you before ...
what? snapped arthur.
the woman with the perm and the smile and the now nearly empty book of
cloakroom tickets was now waving the two last ones under his nose.
i thought id give the opportunity to you, because the prizes are so nice.
she wrinkled up he nose a little confidentially.
very tasteful. i know youll like them. and it is for anjies retirement present
you see. we want to give her ...
a kidney machine, yes, said arthur. here.
he held out two more ten pence pieces to her, and took the tickets.
a thought seemed to strike the woman. it struck her very slowly. you could
watch it coming in like a long wave on a sandy beach.
oh dear, she said, im not interrupting anything am i?
she peered anxiously at both of them.
no its fine, said arthur. everything that could possibly be fine, he in-
sisted, is fine.
thank you, he added.
i say, she said, in a delightful ecstacy of worry, youre not ...
you?
its very hard to say, said arthur. we havent had a chance to talk yet.
he glanced at fenchurch. she was grinning.
the woman nodded with knowing confidentiality.
ill let you see the prizes in a minute, she said, and left.
arthur turned, with a sigh, back to the girl that he found it hard to say whether
he was in love with.
you were about to ask me, she said, a question.
yes, said arthur.
we can do it together if you like, said fenchurch. was i found ...
... in a handbag ... joined in arthur.
... in the left luggage office ... they said together.
... at fenchurch street station, they finished.
and the answer, said fenchurch, is no.

in love, are

63

fine, said arthur.
i was conceived there.
what?
i was con-
in the left luggage office? hooted arthur.
no, of course not. dont be silly. what would my parents be doing in the
left luggage office? she said, rather taken aback by the suggestion.
well, i dont know, spluttered arthur, or rather ...
it was in the ticket queue.
the ...
the ticket queue. or so they claim. they refuse to elaborate. they only
say you wouldnt believe how bored it is possible to get in the ticket queue at
fenchurch street station.
she sipped demurely at her tomato juice and looked at her watch.
arthur continued to gurgle for a moment or two.
im going to have to go in a minute or two, said fenchurch, and you havent
begun to tell me whatever this terrifically extraordinary thing is that you were
so keen to get off your chest.
why dont you let me drive you to london? said arthur. its saturday,
ive got nothing particular to do, id ...
no, said fenchurch, thank you, its sweet of you, but no. i need to be by
myself for a couple of days. she smiled and shrugged.
but ...
you can tell me another time. ill give you my number.
arthurs heart went boom boom churn churn as she scribbled seven figures in
pencil on a scrap of paper and handed it to him.
now we can relax, she said with a slow smile which filled arthur till he
thought he would burst.
fenchurch, he said, enjoying the name as he said it. i -
a box, said a trailing voice, of cherry liqueurs, and also, and i know youll
like this, a gramophone record of scottish bagpipe music ...
yes thank you, very nice, insisted arthur.
i just thought id let you have a look at them, said the permed woman, as
youre down from london ...
she was holding them out proudly for arthur too see. he could see that they
were indeed a box of cherry brandy liqueurs and a record of bagpipe music.
that was what they were.
ill let you have your drink in peace now, she said, patting arthur lightly on
his seething shoulder, but i knew youd like to see.
arthur re-engaged his eyes with fenchurchs once again, and suddenly was at

64

chapter 12.

a loss for something to say. a moment had come and gone between the two
of them, but the whole rhythm of it had been wrecked by that stupid, blasted
woman.
dont worry, said fenchurch, looking at him steadily from over the top of
her glass, we will talk again. she took a sip.
perhaps, she added, it wouldnt have gone so well if it wasnt for her. she
gave a wry little smile and dropped her hair forward over her face again.
it was perfectly true.
he had to admit it was perfectly true.



that night, at home, as he was prancing round the house pretending to be trip-
ping through cornfields in slow motion and continually exploding with sudden
laughter, arthur thought he could even bear to listen to the album of bagpipe
music he had won. it was eight oclock and he decided he would make himself,
force himself, to listen to the whole record before he phoned her. maybe he
should even leave it till tomorrow. that would be the cool thing to do. or
next week sometime.
no. no games. he wanted her and didnt care who knew it. he definitely and
absolutely wanted her, adored her, longed for her, wanted to do more things
than there were names for with her.
he actually caught himself saying thinks like yippee as he prances ridicu-
lously round the house. her eyes, her hair, her voice, everything ...
he stopped.
he would put on the record of bagpipe music. then he would call her.
would he, perhaps, call her first?
no. what he would do was this. he would put on the record of bagpipe music.
he would listen to it, every last banshee wail of it. then he would call her.
that was the correct order. that was what he would do.
he was worried about touching things in case they blew up when he did so.
he picked up the record. it failed to blow up. he slipped it out of its cover.
he opened the record player, he turned on the amp. they both survived. he
giggled foolishly as he lowered the stylus on to the disc.
he sat and listened solemnly to a scottish soldier.
he listened to amazing grace.
he listened to something about some glen or other.
he thought about his miraculous lunchtime.
they had just been on the point of leaving, when they were distracted by an
awful outbreak of yoo-hooing. the appallingly permed woman was waving66

chapter 13.

to them across the room like some stupid bird with a broken wing. everyone
in the pub turned to them and seemed to be expecting some sort of response.
they hadnt listened to the bit about how pleased and happy anjie was going
to be about the 4.30p everyone had helped to raise towards the cost of her
kidney machine, had been vaguely aware that someone from the next table
had won a box of cherry brandy liqueurs, and took a moment or two to cotton
on to the fact that the yoo-hooing lady was trying to ask them if they had
ticket number 37.
arthur discovered that he had. he glanced angrily at his watch.
fenchurch gave him a push.
go on, she said, go and get it. dont be bad tempered. give them a nice
speech about how pleased you are and you can give me a call and tell me how
it went. ill want to hear the record. go on.
she flicked his arm and left.
the regulars thought his acceptance speech a little over- effusive. it was, after
all, merely an album of bagpipe music.
arthur thought about it, and listened to the music, and kept on breaking into
laughter.



ring ring.
ring ring.
ring ring.
hello, yes? yes, thats right. yes. youll ave to speak up, theres an awful
lot of noise in ere. what?
no, i only do the bar in the evenings. its yvonne who does lunch, and jim,
hes the landlord. no, i wasnt on. what?
youll have to speak up.
what? no, dont know anything about no raffle. what?
no, dont know nothing about it. old on, ill call jim.
the barmaid put her hand over the receiver and called over the noisy bar.
ere, jim, bloke on the phone says something about hes won a raffle. he
keeps on saying its ticket 37 and hes won.
no, there was a guy in the pub here won, shouted back the barman.
he says ave we got the ticket.
well how can he think hes won if he hasnt even got a ticket?
jim says ow can you think youve won if you avent even got the ticket.
what?
she put her hand over the receiver again.
jim, e keeps effing and blinding at me. says theres a number on the ticket.
course there was a number on the ticket, it was a bloody raffle ticket wasnt
it?
e says e means its a telephone number on the ticket.
put the phone down and serve the bloody customers, will you?68

chapter 14.



eight hours west sat a man alone on a beach mourning an inexplicable loss.
he could only think of his loss in little packets of grief at a time, because the
whole thing was too great to be borne.
he watched the long slow pacific waves come in along the sand, and waited
and waited for the nothing that he knew was about to happen. as the time
came for it not to happen, it duly didnt happen and so the afternoon wore
itself away and the sun dropped beneath the long line of sea, and the day was
gone.
the beach was a beach we shall not name, because his private house was
there, but it was a small sandy stretch somewhere along the hundreds of miles
of coastline that first runs west from los angeles, which is described in the
new edition of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy in one entry as junky,
wunky, lunky, stunky, and whats that other word, and all kinds of bad stuff,
woo, and in another, written only hours later as being like several thousand
square miles of american express junk mail, but without the same sense of
moral depth. plus the air is, for some reason, yellow.
the coastline runs west, and then turns north up to the misty bay of san
francisco, which the guide describes as a good place to go. its very easy
to believe that everyone you meet there is also a space traveller. starting a
new religion for you is just their way of saying hi. until youve settled in
and got the hang of the place it is best to say no to three questions out of
any given four that anyone may ask you, because there are some very strange
things going on there, some of which an unsuspecting alien could die of. the
hundreds of curling miles of cliffs and sand, palm trees, breakers and sunsets
are described in the guide as boffo. a good one.
and somewhere on this good boffo stretch of coastline lay the house of this
inconsolable man, a man whom many regarded as being insane. but this was
only, as he would tell people, because he was.70

chapter 15.

one of the many many reasons why people thought him insane was because of
the peculiarity of his house which, even in a land where most peoples houses
were peculiar in one way or another, was quite extreme in his peculiarness.
his house was called the outside of the asylum.
his name was simply john watson, though he preferred to be called - and
some of his friends had now reluctantly agreed to this - wonko the sane.
in his house were a number of strange things, including a grey glass bowl with
eight words engraved upon it.
we can talk of him much later on - this is just an interlude to watch the sun
go down and to say that he was there watching it.
he had lost everything he cared for, and was now simply waiting for the end
of the world - little realizing that it had already been and gone.



after a disgusting sunday spent emptying rubbish bins behind a pub in taunton,
and finding nothing, no raffle ticket, no telephone number, arthur tried ev-
erything he could to find fenchurch, and the more things he tried, the more
weeks passed.
he raged and railed against himself, against fate, against the world and its
weather. he even, in his sorrow and his fury, went and sat in the motorway
service station cafeteria where hed been just before he met her.
its the drizzle that makes me particularly morose.
please shut up about the drizzle, snapped arthur.
i would shut up if it would shut up drizzling.
look ...
but ill tell you what it will do when it shuts up drizzling, shall i?
no.
blatter.
what?
it will blatter.
arthur stared over the rim of his coffee cup at the grisly outside world. it was
a completely pointless place to be, he realized, and he had been driven there by
superstition rather than logic. however, as if to bait him with the knowledge
that such coincidences could in fact happen, fate had chosen to reunite him
with the lorry driver he had encountered there last time.
the more he tried to ignore him, the more he found himself being dragged
back into the gravitic whirlpool of the mans exasperating conversation.
i think, said arthur vaguely, cursing himself for even bothering to say this,
that its easing off.
ha!
arthur just shrugged. he should go. thats what he should do. he should
just go.72

chapter 16.

it never stops raining! ranted the lorry driver. he thumped the table, spilt
his tea, and actually, for a moment, appeared to be steaming.
you cant just walk off without responding to a remark like that.
of course it stops raining, said arthur. it was hardly an elegant refutation,
but it had to be said.
it rains ... all ... the time, raved the man, thumping the table again, in time
to the words.
arthur shook his head.
stupid to say it rains all the time ... he said.
the mans eyebrows shot up, affronted.
stupid? whys it stupid? whys it stupid to say it rains all the time if it
rains the whole time?
didnt rain yesterday.
did in darlington.
arthur paused, warily.
you going to ask me where i was yesterday? asked the man. eh?
no, said arthur.
but i expect you can guess.
do you.
begins with a d.
does it.
and it was pissing down there, i can tell you.
you dont want to sit there, mate, said a passing stranger in overalls to
arthur cheerily. thats thundercloud corner that is. reserved special for
old raindrops keep falling on my head here. theres one reserved in every
motorway caff between here and sunny denmark. steer clear is my advice.
swhat we all do. hows it going, rob? keeping busy? got your wet-weather
tyres on? har har.
he breezed by and went to tell a joke about britt ekland to someone at a
nearby table.
see, none of them bastards take me seriously, said rob mckeena. but,
he added darkly, leaning forward and screwing up his eyes, they all know its
true!
arthur frowned.
like my wife, hissed the sole owner and driver of mckeenas all-weather
haulage. she says its nonsense and i make a fuss and complain about noth-
ing, but, he paused dramatically and darted out dangerous looks from his
eyes, she always brings the washing in when i phone to say im on me way
home! he brandished his coffee spoon. what do you make of that?
well ...

73

i have a book, he went on, i have a book. a diary. kept it for fifteen
years. shows every single place ive ever been. every day. and also what the
weather was like. and it was uniformly, he snarled, orrible. all over eng-
land, scotland, wales i been. all round the continent, italy, germany, back
and forth to denmark, been to yugoslavia.
its all marked in and charted.
even when i went to visit my brother, he added, in seattle.
well, said arthur, getting up to leave at last, perhaps youd better show it
to someone.
i will, said rob mckeena.
and he did.

74

chapter 16.



misery, dejection. more misery and more dejection. he needed a project and
he gave himself one.
he would find where his cave had been.
on prehistoric earth he had lived in a cave, not a nice cave, a lousy cave, but
... there was no but. it had been a totally lousy cave and he had hated it.
but he had lived in it for five years which made it home of some kind, and a
person likes to keep track of his homes. arthur dent was such a person and
so he went to exeter to buy a computer.
that was what he really wanted, of course, a computer. but he felt he ought
to have some serious purpose in mind before he simply went and lashed out a
lot of readies on what people might otherwise mistake as being just a thing to
play with. so that was his serious purpose. to pinpoint the exact location of
a cave on prehistoric earth. he explained this to the man in the shop.
why? said the man in the shop.
this was a tricky one.
ok, skip that, said the man in the shop. how?
well, i was hoping you could help me with that.
the man sighed and his shoulders dropped.
have you much experience of computers?
arthur wondered whether to mention eddie the shipboard computer on the
heart of gold, who could have done the job in a second, or deep thought, or
- but decided he wouldnt.
no, he said.
looks like a fun afternoon, said the man in the shop, but he said it only to
himself.
arthur bought the apple anyway. over a few days he also acquired some
astronomical software, plotted the movements of stars, drew rough little dia-
grams of how he seemed to remember the stars to have been in the sky when76

chapter 17.

he looked up out of his cave at night, and worked away busily at it for weeks,
cheerfully putting off the conclusion he knew he would inevitably have to come
to, which was that the whole project was completely ludicrous.
rough drawings from memory were futile. he didnt even know how long it
had been, beyond ford prefects rough guess at the time that it was a couple
of million years and he simply didnt have the maths.
still, in the end he worked out a method which would at least produce a result.
he decided not to mind the fact that with the extraordinary jumble of rules
of thumb, wild approximations and arcane guesswork he was using he would
be lucky to hit the right galaxy, he just went ahead and got a result.
he would call it the right result. who would know?
as it happened, through the myriad and unfathomable chances of fate, he got
it exactly right, though he of course would never know that. he just went up
to london and knocked on the appropriate door.
oh. i thought you were going to phone me first.
arthur gaped in astonishment.
you can only come in for a few minutes, said fenchurch. im just going
out.



a summers day in islington, full of the mournful wail of antique-restoring
machinery.
fenchurch was unavoidably busy for the afternoon, so arthur wandered in a
blissed-out haze and looked at all the shops which, in islington, are quite an
useful bunch, as anyone who regularly needs old woodworking tools, boer war
helmets, drag, office furniture or fish will readily confirm.
the sun beat down over the roofgardens. it beat on architects and plumbers.
it beat on barristers and burglars. it beat on pizzas. it beat on estate agents
particulars.
it beat on arthur as he went into a restored furniture shop.
its an interesting building, said the proprietor, cheerfully. theres a cellar
with a secret passage which connects with a nearby pub. it was built for the
prince regent apparently, so he could make his escape when he needed to.
you mean, in case anybody might catch him buying stripped pine furniture,
said arthur
no, said the proprietor, not for that reason.
youll have to excuse me, said arthur. im terribly happy.
i see.
he wandered hazily on and found himself outside the offices of greenpeace.
he remembered the contents of his file marked things to do - urgent!, which
he hadnt opened again in the meantime. he marched in with a cheery smile
and said hed come to give them some money to help free the dolphins.
very funny, they told him, go away.
this wasnt quite the response he had expected, so he tried again. this time
they got quite angry with him, so he just left some money anyway and went
back out into the sunshine.
just after six he returned to fenchurchs house in the alleyway, clutching a
bottle of champagne.78

chapter 18.

hold this, she said, shoved a stout rope in his hand and disappeared inside
through the large white wooden doors from which dangled a fat padlock off a
black iron bar.
the house was a small converted stable in a light industrial alleyway behind
the derelict royal agricultural hall of islington. as well as its large stable
doors it also had a normal-looking front door of smartly glazed panelled wood
with a black dolphin door knocker. the one odd thing about this door was
its doorstep, which was nine feet high, since the door was set into the upper
of the two floors and presumably had been originally used to haul in hay for
hungry horses.
an old pulley jutted out of the brickwork above the doorway and it was over
this that the rope arthur was holding was slung. the other end of the rope
held a suspended cello.
the door opened above his head.
ok, said fenchurch, pull on the rope, steady the cello. pass it up to me.
he pulled on the rope, he steadied the cello.
i cant pull on the rope again, he said, without letting go of the cello.
fenchurch leant down.
im steadying the cello, she said. you pull on the rope.
the cello eased up level with the doorway, swinging slightly, and fenchurch
manoeuvred it inside.
come on up yourself, she called down.
arthur picked up his bag of goodies and went in through the stable doors,
tingling.
the bottom room, which he had seen briefly before, was pretty rough and
full of junk. a large old cast-iron mangle stood there, a surprising number of
kitchen sinks were piled in a corner. there was also, arthur was momentarily
alarmed to see, a pram, but it was very old and uncomplicatedly full of books.
the floor was old stained concrete, excitingly cracked. and this was the mea-
sure of arthurs mood as he stared up the rickety wooden steps in the far
corner. even a cracked concrete floor seemed to him an almost unbearably
sensual thing.
an architect friend of mine keeps on telling me how he can do wonderful
things with this place, said fenchurch chattily as arthur emerged through
the floor. he keeps on coming round, standing in stunned amazement mut-
tering about space and objects and events and marvellous qualities of light,
then says he needs a pencil and disappears for weeks. wonderful things have,
therefore, so far failed to happen to it.
in fact, thought arthur as he looked about, the upper room was at least rea-
sonably wonderful anyway.
it was simply decorated, furnished with things

79

made out of cushions and also a stereo set with speakers which would have
impressed the guys who put up stonehenge.
there were flowers which were pale and pictures which were interesting.
there was a sort of gallery structure in the roof space which held a bed and
also a bathroom which, fenchurch explained, you could actually swing a cat
in. but, she added, only if it was a reasonably patient cat and didnt mind
a few nasty cracks about the head. so. here you are.
yes.
they looked at each other for a moment.
the moment became a longer moment, and suddenly it was a very long mo-
ment, so long one could hardly tell where all the time was coming from.
for arthur, who could usually contrive to feel self-conscious if left alone for
long enough with a swiss cheese plant, the moment was one of sustained reve-
lation. he felt on the sudden like a cramped and zoo-born animal who awakes
one morning to find the door to his cage hanging quietly open and the savan-
nah stretching grey and pink to the distant rising sun, while all around new
sounds are waking.
he wondered what the new sounds were as he gazed at her openly wondering
face and her eyes that smiled with a shared surprise.
he hadnt realized that life speaks with a voice to you, a voice that brings
you answers to the questions you continually ask of it, had never consciously
detected it or recognized its tones till it now said something it had never said
to him before, which was yes.
fenchurch dropped her eyes away at last, with a tiny shake of her head.
i know, she said. i shall have to remember, she added, that you are the
sort of person who cannot hold on to a simple piece of paper for two minutes
without winning a raffle with it.
she turned away.
lets go for a walk, she said quickly. hyde park. ill change into something
less suitable.
she was dressed in a rather severe dark dress, not a particularly shapely one,
and it didnt really suit her.
i wear it specially for my cello teacher, she said. hes a nice boy, but
i sometimes think all that bowing gets him a bit excited. ill be down in a
moment.
she ran lightly up the steps to the gallery above, and called down, put the
bottle in the fridge for later.
he noticed as he slipped the champagne bottle into the door that it had an
identical twin to sit next to.
he walked over to the window and looked out. he turned and started to look

80

chapter 18.

at her records. from above he heard the rustle of her dress fall to the ground.
he talked to himself about the sort of person he was. he told himself very
firmly that for this moment at least he would keep his eyes very firmly and
steadfastly locked on to the spines of her records, read the titles, nod appre-
ciatively, count the blasted things if he had to. he would keep his head down.
this he completely, utterly and abjectly failed to do.
she was staring down at him with such intensity that she seemed hardly to no-
tice that he was looking up at her. then suddenly she shook her head, dropped
the light sundress over herself and disappeared quickly into the bathroom.
she emerged a moment later, all smiles and with a sunhat and came tripping
down the steps with extraordinary lightness. it was a strange kind of dancing
motion she had. she saw that he noticed it and put her head slightly on one
side.
like it? she said.
you look gorgeous, he said simply, because she did.
hmmmm, she said, as if he hadnt really answered her question.
she closed the upstairs front door which had stood open all this time, and
looked around the little room to see that it was all in a fit state to be left
on its own for a while. arthurs eyes followed hers around, and while he was
looking in the other direction she slipped something out of a drawer and into
the canvas bag she was carrying.
arthur looked back at her.
ready?
did you know, she said with a slightly puzzled smile, that theres some-
thing wrong with me?
her directness caught arthur unprepared.
well, he said, id heard some vague sort of ...
i wonder how much you do know about me, she said. i you heard it from
where i think you heard then thats not it. russell just sort of makes stuff up,
because he cant deal with what it really is.
a pang of worry went through arthur.
then what is it? he said. can you tell me?
dont worry, she said, its nothing bad at all. just unusual. very very
unusual.
she touched his hand, and then leant forward and kissed him briefly.
i shall be very interested to know, she said, if you manage to work out
what it is this evening.
arthur felt that if someone tapped him at that point he would have chimed,
like the deep sustained rolling chime his grey fishbowl made when he flicked
it with his thumbnail.

81

82

chapter 18.



ford prefect was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound of gunfire.
he slid himself out of the maintenance hatchway which he had fashioned into a
bunk for himself by disabling some of the noisier machinery in his vicinity and
padding it with towels. he slung himself down the access ladder and prowled
the corridors moodily.
they were claustrophobic and ill-lit, and what light there was was continually
flickering and dimming as power surged this way and that through the ship,
causing heavy vibrations and rasping humming noises.
that wasnt it, though.
he paused and leaned back against the wall as something that looked like a
small silver power drill flew past him down the dim corridor with a nasty sear-
ing screech.
that wasnt it either.
he clambered listlessly through a bulkhead door and found himself in a larger
corridor, though still ill-lit.
the ship lurched. it had been doing this a fair bit, but this was heavier. a
small platoon of robots weent by making a terrible clattering.
still not it, though.
acrid smoke was drifting up from one end of the corridor, so he walked along
it in the other direction.
he passed a series of observation monitors let into the walls behind plates of
toughened but still badly scratched perspex.
one of them showed some horrible green scaly reptilian figure ranting and
raving about the single transferable vote system. it was hard to tell whether
he was for or against it, but he clearly felt very strongly about it. ford turned
the sound down.
that wasnt it, though.
he passed another monitor. it was showing a commercial for some brand of84

chapter 19.

toothpaste that would apparently make you feel free if you used it. there was
nasty blaring music with it too, but that wasnt it.
he came upon another, much larger three-dimensional screen that was moni-
toring the outside of the vast silver xaxisian ship.
as he watched, a thousand horribly beweaponed zirzla robot starcruisers came
searing round the dark shadow of a moon, silhouetted against the blinding
disc of the star xaxis, and the ship simultaneously unleashed a vicious blaze
of hideously incomprehensible forces from all its orifices against them.
that was it.
ford shook his head irritably and rubbed his eyes. he slumped on the wrecked
body of a dull silver robot which clearly had been burning earlier on, but had
now cooled down enough to sit on.
he yawned and dug his copy of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy out of
his satchel. he activated the screen, and flicked idly through some level three
entries and some level four entries. he was looking for some good insomnia
cures. he found rest, which was what he reckoned he needed. he found rest
and recuperation and was about to pass on when he suddenly had a better
idea. he looked up at the monitor screen. the battle was raging more fiercely
every second and the noise was appalling. the ship juddered, screamed, and
lurched as each new bolt of stunning energy was delivered or received.
he looked back down at the guide again and flipped through a few likely lo-
cations. he suddenly laughed, and then rummaged in his satchel again.
he pulled out a small memory dump module, wiped off the fluff and biscuit
crumbs, and plugged it into an interface on the back of the guide.
when all the information that he could think was relevant had been dumped
into the module, he unplugged it again, tossed it lightly in the palm of his
hand, put the guide away in his satchel, smirked, and went in search of the
ships computer data banks.



the purpose of having the sun go low in the evenings, in the summer, espe-
cially in parks, said the voice earnestly, is to make girls breasts bob up and
down more clearly to the eye. i am convinced that this is the case.
arthur and fenchurch giggled about this to each other as they passed. she
hugged him more tightly for a moment.
and i am certain, said the frizzy ginger-haired youth with the long thin
nose who was epostulating from his deckchair by the side of the serpentine,
that if one worked the argument through, one would find that it flowed with
perfect naturalness and logic from everything, he insisted to his thin dark-
haired companion who was slumped in the next door deckchair feeling dejected
about his spots, that darwin was going on about. this is certain. this is
indisputable. and, he added, i love it.
he turned sharply and squinted through his spectacles at fenchurch. arthur
steered her away and could feel her silently quaking.
next guess, she said, when she had stopped giggling, come on.
all right, he said, your elbow. your left elbow. theres something wrong
with your left elbow.
wrong again, she said, completely wrong. youre on completely the wrong
track.
the summer sun was sinking through the tress in the park, looking as if -
lets not mince words. hyde park is stunning. everything about it is stun-
ning except for the rubbish on monday mornings. even the ducks are stunning.
anyone who can go through hyde park on a summers evening and not feel
moved by it is probably going through in an ambulance with the sheet pulled
over their face.
it is a park in which people do more extraordinary things than they do else-
where. arthur and fenchurch found a man in shorts practising the bagpipes
to himself under a tree. the piper paused to chase off an american couple86

chapter 20.

who had tried, timidly to put some coins on the box his bagpipes came in.
no! he shouted at them, go away! im only practising.
he started resolutely to reinflate his bag, but even the noise this made could
not disfigure their mood.
arthur put his arms around her and moved them slowly downwards.
i dont think it can be your bottom, he said after a while, there doesnt
seem to be anything wrong with that at all.
yes, she agreed, theres absolutely nothing wrong with my bottom.
they kissed for so long that eventually the piper went and practised on the
other side of the tree.
ill tell you a story, said arthur.
good.
they found a patch of grass which was relatively free of couples actually lying
on top of each other and sat and watched the stunning ducks and the low
sunlight rippling on the water which ran beneath the stunning ducks.
a story, said fenchurch, cuddling his arm to her.
which will tell you something of the sort of things that happen to me. its
absolutely true.
you know sometimes people tell you stories that are supposed to be some-
thing that happened to their wifes cousins best friend, but actually probably
got made up somewhere along the line.
well, its like one of those stories, except that it actually happened, and i
know it actually happened, because the person it actually happened to was
me.
like the raffle ticket.
arthur laughed. yes. i had a train to catch, he went on. i arrived at the
station ...
did i ever tell you, interrupted fenchurch, what happened to my parents
in a station?
yes, said arthur, you did.
just checking.
arthur glanced at his watch. i suppose we could think of getting back, he
said.
tell me the story, said fenchurch firmly. you arrived at the station.
i was about twenty minutes early.
i
suppose it is at least equally possible, he added after a moments reflection,
that british rail had got the time of the train wrong. hadnt occurred to me
before.
get on with it. fenchurch laughed.
so i bought a newspaper, to do the crossword, and went to the buffet to get

id got the time of the train wrong.

87

a cup of coffee.
you do the crossword?
yes.
which one?
the guardian usually.
i think it tries to be too cute. i prefer the times. did you solve it?
what?
the crossword in the guardian.
i havent had a chance to look at it yet, said arthur, im still trying to buy
the coffee.
all right then. buy the coffee.
im buying it. i am also, said arthur, buying some biscuits.
what sort?
rich tea.
good choice.
i like them. laden with all these new possessions, i go and sit at a table.
and dont ask me what the table was like because this was some time ago and
i cant remember. it was probably round.
all right.
so let me give you the layout. me sitting at the table. on my left, the news-
paper. on my right, the cup of coffee. in the middle of the table, the packet
of biscuits.
i see it perfectly.
what you dont see, said arthur, because i havent mentioned him yet, is
the guy sitting at the table already. he is sitting there opposite me.
whats he like?
perfectly ordinary. briefcase. business suit. he didnt look, said arthur,
as if he was about to do anything weird.
ah. i know the type. what did he do?
he did this. he leaned across the table, picked up the packet of biscuits, tore
it open, took one out, and ...
what?
ate it.
what?
he ate it.
fenchurch looked at him in astonishment. what on earth did you do?
well, in the circumstances i did what any red-blooded englishman would do.
i was compelled, said arthur, to ignore it.
what? why?
well, its not the sort of thing youre trained for is it? i searched my soul, and

88

chapter 20.

discovered that there was nothing anywhere in my upbringing, experience or
even primal instincts to tell me how to react to someone who has quite simply,
calmly, sitting right there in front of me, stolen one of my biscuits.
well, you could ... fenchurch thought about it. i must say im not sure
what i would have done either. so what happened?
i stared furiously at the crossword, said arthur. couldnt do a single clue,
took a sip of coffee, it was too hot to drink, so there was nothing for it. i
braced myself.
i took a biscuit, trying very hard not to notice, he added,
that the packet was already mysteriously open ...
but youre fighting back, taking a tough line.
after my fashion, yes. i ate the biscuit. i ate it very deliberately and visibly,
so that he would have no doubt as to what it was i was doing. when i eat a
biscuit, arthur said, it stays eaten.
so what did he do?
took another one. honestly, insisted arthur, this is exactly what hap-
pened. he took another biscuit, he ate it. clear as daylight. certain as we
are sitting on the ground.
fenchurch stirred uncomfortably.
and the problem was, said arthur, that having not said anything the first
time, it was somehow even more difficult to broach the subject the second
time around. what do you say? excuse me ... i couldnt help noticing, er
... doesnt work. no, i ignored it with, if anything, even more vigour than
previously.
my man ...
stared at the crossword, again, still couldnt budge a bit of it, so showing
some of the spirit that henry v did on st crispins day ...
what?
i went into the breach again. i took, said arthur, another biscuit. and for
an instant our eyes met.
like this?
yes, well, no, not quite like that. but they met. just for an instant. and we
both looked away. but i am here to tell you, said arthur, that there was
a little electricity in the air. there was a little tension building up over the
table. at about this time.
i can imagine.
we went through the whole packet like this. him, me, him, me ...
the whole packet?
well it was only eight biscuits but it seemed like a lifetime of biscuits we were
getting through at this point. gladiators could hardly have had a tougher
time.

89

gladiators, said fenchurch, would have had to do it in the sun. more phys-
ically gruelling.
there is that. so. when the empty packet was lying dead between us the
man at last got up, having done his worst, and left. i heaved a sigh of relief,
of course. as it happened, my train was announced a moment or two later, so
i finished my coffee, stood up, picked up the newspaper, and underneath the
newspaper ...
yes?
were my biscuits.
what? said fenchurch. what?
true.
no! she gasped and tossed herself back on the grass laughing.
she sat up again.
you completely nitwit, she hooted, you almost completely and utterly fool-
ish person.
she pushed him backwards, rolled over him, kissed him and rolled off again.
he was surprised at how light she was.
now you tell me a story.
i thought, she said putting on a low husky voice, that you were very keen
to get back.
no hurry, he said airily, i want you to tell me a story.
she looked out over the kale and pondered.
all right, she said, its only a short one. and not funny like yours, but ...
anyway.
she looked down. arthur could feel that it was one of those sorts of moments.
the air seemed to stand still around them, waiting. arthur wished that the
air would go away and mind its own business.
when i was a kid, she said. these sort of stories always start like this,
dont they, when i was a kid ... anyway. this is the bit where the girl
suddenly says, when i was a kid and starts to unburden herself. we have
got to that bit. when i was a kid i had this picture hanging over the foot of
my bed ... what do you think of it so far?
i like it. i think its moving well. youre getting the bedroom interest in nice
and early. we could probably do with some development with the picture.
it was one of those pictures that children are supposed to like, she said, but
dont. full of endearing little animals doing endearing things, you know?
i know. i was plagued with them too. rabbits in waistcoats.
exactly. these rabbits were in fact on a raft, as were assorted rats and owls.
there may even have been a reindeer.
on the raft.

90

chapter 20.

on the raft. and a boy was sitting on the raft.
among the rabbits in waistcoats and the owls and the reindeer.
precisely there. a boy of the cheery gypsy ragamuffin variety.
ugh.
the picture worried me, i must say. there was an otter swimming in front of
the raft, and i used to lie awake at night worrying about this otter having to
pull the raft, with all these wretched animals on it who shouldnt even be on
a raft, and the otter had such a thin tail to pull it with i thought it must hurt
pulling it all the time. worried me. not badly, but just vaguely, all the time.
then one day - and remember id been looking at this picture every night for
years - i suddenly noticed that the raft had a sail. never seen it before. the
otter was fine, he was just swimming along.
she shrugged.
good story? she said.
ends weakly, said arthur, leaves the audience crying yes, but what of it?
fine up till there, but needs a final sting before the credits.
fenchurch laughed and hugged her legs.
it was just such a sudden revelation, years of almost unnoticed worry just
dropping away, like taking off heavy weights, like black and white becoming
colour, like a dry stick suddenly being watered. the sudden shift of perspec-
tive that says put away your worries, the world is a good and perfect place.
it is in fact very easy. you probably thing im saying that because im going
to say that i felt like that this afternoon or something, dont you?
well, i ... said arthur, his composure suddenly shattered.
well, its all right, she said, i did. thats exactly what i felt. but you see,
ive felt that before, even stronger. incredibly strongly. im afraid im a bit of
a one, she said gazing off into the distance, for sudden startling revelations.
arthur was at sea, could hardly speak, and felt it wiser, therefore, for the mo-
ment not to try.
it was very odd, she said, much as one of the pursuing egyptians might have
said that the behaviour of the red sea when moses waved his rod at it was a
little on the strange side.
very odd, she repeated, for days before, the strangest feeling had been
building in me, as if i was going to give birth. no, it wasnt like that in fact,
it was more as if i was being connected into something, bit by bit. no, not
even that; it was as if the whole of the earth, through me, was going to ...
does the number, said arthur gently, forty-two mean anything to you at
all?
what? no, what are you talking about? exclaimed fenchurch.
just a thought, murmured arthur.

91

arthur, i mean this, this is very real to me, this is serious.
i was being perfectly serious, said arthur. its just the universe im never
quite sure about.
what do you mean by that?
tell me the rest of it, he said. dont worry if it sounds odd. believe me,
you are talking to someone who has seen a lot of stuff, he added, that is
odd. and i dont mean biscuits.
she nodded, and seemed to believe him. suddenly, she gripped his arm.
it was so simple, she said, so wonderfully and extraordinarily simple, when
it came.
what was it? said arthur quietly.
arthur, you see, she said, thats what i no longer know. and the loss is
unbearable. if i try to think back to it, it all goes flickery and jumpy, and if i
try too hard, i get as far as the teacup and i just black out.
what?
well, like your story, she said, the best bit happened in a cafe.
i was
sitting there, having a cup of tea. this was after days of this build up, the
feeling of becoming connected up. i think i was buzzing gently. and there was
some work going on at a building site opposite the cafe, and i was watching
it through the window, over the rim of my teacup, which i always find is the
nicest way of watching other people working. and suddenly, there it was in
my mind, this message from somewhere. and it was so simple. it made such
sense of everything. i just sat up and thought, oh! oh, well thats all right
then.
i was so startled i almost dropped my teacup, in fact i think i did
drop it. yes, she added thoughtfully, im sure i did. how much sense am i
making?
it was fine up to the bit about the teacup.
she shook her head, and shook it again, as if trying to clear it, which is what
she was trying to do.
well thats it, she said. fine up to the bit about the teacup. that was the
point at which it seemed to me quite literally as if the world exploded.
what ...?
i know it sounds crazy, and everybody says it was hallucinations, but if that
was hallucinations then i have hallucinations in big screen 3d with 16-track
dolby stereo and should probably hire myself out to people who are bored
with shark movies. it was as if the ground was literally ripped from under my
feet, and ... and ...
she patted the grass lightly, as if for reassurance, and then seemed to change
her mind about what she was going to say.
and i woke up in hospital. i suppose ive been in and out ever since. and

92

chapter 20.

thats why i have an instinctive nervousness, she said, of sudden startling
revelations thats everythings going to be all right. she looked up at him.
arthur had simply ceased to worry himself about the strange anomalies sur-
rounding his return to his home world, or rather had consigned them to that
part of his mind marked things to think about - urgent. here is the
world, he had told himself. here, for whatever reason, is the world, and
here it stays. with me on it. but now it seemed to go swimmy around him,
as it had that night in the car when fenchurchs brother had told him the silly
stories about the cia agent in the reservoir. the trees went swimmy. the
lake went swimmy, but this was perfectly natural and nothing to be alarmed
by because a grey goose had just landed on it. the geese were having a great
relaxed time and had no major answers they wished to know the questions to.
anyway, said fenchurch, suddenly and brightly and with a wide- eyed smile,
there is something wrong with part of me, and youve got to find out what
it is. well go home.
arthur shook his head.
whats the matter? she said.
arthur had shaken his head, not to disagree with her suggestion which he
thought was a truly excellent one, one of the worlds great suggestions, but
because he was just for a moment trying to free himself of the recurring im-
pression he had that just when he was least expecting it the universe would
suddenly leap out from behind a door and go boo at him.
im just trying to get this entirely clear in my mind, said arthur, you say
you felt as if the earth actually ... exploded ...
yes. more than felt.
which is what everybody else says, he said hesitantly, is hallucinations?
yes, but arthur thats ridiculous. people think that if you just say halluci-
nations it explains anything you want it to explain and eventually whatever
it is you cant understand will just go away. its just a word, it doesnt explain
anything. it doesnt explain why the dolphins disappeared.
no, said arthur. no, he added thoughtfully. no, he added again, even
more thoughtfully. what? he said at last.
doesnt explain the dolphins disappearing.
no, said arthur, i see that. which dolphins do you mean?
what do you mean which dolphins? im talking about when all the dolphins
disappeared.
she put her hand on his knee, which made him realize that the tingling going
up and down his spine was not her gently stroking his back, and must instead
be one of the nasty creepy feelings he so often got when people were trying to
explain things to him.

93

the dolphins?
yes.
all the dolphins, said arthur, disappeared?
yes.
the dolphins? youre saying the dolphins all disappeared? is this, said
arthur, trying to be absolutely clear on this point, what youre saying?
arthur where have you been for heavens sake? the dolphins all disappeared
on the same day i ...
she stared him intently in his startled eyes.
what ...?
no dolphins. all gone. vanished.
she searched his face.
did you really not know that?
it was clear from his startled expression that he did not.
where did they go? he asked.
no one knows. thats what vanished means. she paused. well, there is
one man who says he knows about it, but everyone says he lives in california,
she said, and is mad. i was thinking of going to see him because it seems the
only lead ive got on what happened to me.
she shrugged, and then looked at him long and quietly. she lay her hand on
the side of his face.
i really would like to know where youve been, she said. i think something
terrible happened to you then as well. and thats why we recognized each
other.
she glanced around the park, which was now being gathered into the clutches
of dusk.
well, she said, now youve got someone you can tell.
arthur slowly let out a long year of a sigh.
it is, he said, a very long story.
fenchurch leaned across him and drew over her canvas bag.
is it anything to do with this? she said. the thing she took out of her bag was
battered and travelworn as it had been hurled into prehistoric rivers, baked
under the sun that shines so redly on the deserts of kakrafoon, half-buried
in the marbled sands that fringe the heady vapoured oceans of santraginus
v, frozen on the glaciers of the moon of jaglan beta, sat on, kicked around
spaceships, scuffed and generally abused, and since its makers had thought
that these were exactly the sorts of things that might happen to it, they had
thoughtfully encased it in a sturdy plastic cover and written on it, in large
friendly letters, the words dont panic.
where did you get this? said arthur, startled, taking it from her.

94

chapter 20.

in russells car that night. you

ah, she said, i thought it was yours.
dropped it. have you been to many of these places?
arthur drew the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy from its cover. it was like
a small, thin, flexible lap computer. he tapped some buttons till the screen
flared with text.
a few, he said.
can we go to them?
what? no, said arthur abruptly, then relented, but relented warily. do
you want to? he said, hoping for the answer no. it was an act of great gen-
erosity on his part not to say, you dont want to, do you? which expects it.
yes, she said. i want to know what the message was that i lost, and where
it came from. because i dont think, she added, standing up and looking
round the increasing gloom of the park, that it came from here.
im not even sure, she further added, slipping her arm around arthurs waist,
that i know where here is.



the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy is, as has been remarked before often
and accurately, a pretty startling kind of a thing.
it is, essentially, as the
title implies, a guide book. the problem is, or rather one of the problems,
for there are many, a sizeable portion of which are continually clogging up the
civil, commercial and criminal courts in all areas of the galaxy, and especially,
where possible, the more corrupt ones, this.
the previous sentence makes sense. that is not the problem.
this is:
change.
read it through again and youll get it.
the galaxy is a rapidly changing place. there is, frankly, so much of it, every
bit of which is continually on the move, continually changing. a bit of a night-
mare, you might think, for a scrupulous and conscientious editor diligently
striving to keep this massively detailed and complex electronic tome abreast
of all the changing circumstances and conditions that the galaxy throws up
every minute of every hour of every day, and you would be wrong. where you
would be wrong would be in failing to realize that the editor, like all the edi-
tors of the guide has ever had, has no real grasp of the meanings of the words
scrupulous, conscientious or diligent, and tends to get his nightmares
through a straw.
entries tend to get updated or not across the sub-etha net according to if
they read good.
take for example, the case of brequinda on the foth of avalars, famed in myth,
legend and stultifyingly dull tri-d mini-serieses as home of the magnificent and
magical fuolornis fire dragon.
in ancient days, when fragilis sang and saxaquine of the quenelux held sway,
when the air was sweet and the nights fragrant, but everyone somehow man-
aged to be, or so they claimed, though how on earth they could have thought96

chapter 21.

that anyone was even remotely likely to believe such a preposterous claim what
with all the sweet air and fragrant nights and whatnot is anyones guess, vir-
gins, it was not possible to heave a brick on brequinda in the foth of avalars
without hitting at least half a dozen fuolornis fire dragons.
whether you would want to do that is another matter.
not that fire dragons werent an essentially peace-loving species, because they
were. they adored it to bits, and this wholesale adoring of things to bits was
often in itself the problem: one so often hurts the one one loves, especially if
one is a fuolornis fire dragon with breath like a rocket booster and teeth like
a park fence. another problem was that once they were in the mood they often
went on to hurt quite a lot of the ones that other people loved as well. add
to all that the relatively small number of madmen who actually went around
the place heaving bricks, and you end up with a lot of people on brequinda in
the foth of avalars getting seriously hurt by dragons.
but did they mind? they did not.
were they heard to bemoan their fate? no.
the fuolornis fire dragons were revered throughout the lands of brequinda
in the foth of valors for their savage beauty, their noble ways and their habit
of biting people who didnt revere them.
why was this?
the answer was simple.
sex.
there is, for some unfathomed reason, something almost unbearably sexy
about having huge fire-breathing magical dragons flying low about the sky
on moonlit nights which were already dangerously on the sweet and fragrant
side.
why this should be so, the romance-besotted people of brequinda in the foth
of avalars could not have told you, and would not have stopped to discuss
the matter once the effect was up and going, for no sooner would a flock of
half a dozen silk-winged leather-bodied fuolornis fire dragons heave into sight
across the evening horizon than half the people of brequinda are scurrying off
into the woods with the other half, there to spend a busy breathless night
together and emerge with the first rays of dawn all smiling and happy and still
claiming, rather endearingly, to be virgins, if rather flushed and sticky virgins.
pheromones, some researchers said.
something sonic, others claimed.
the place was always stiff with researchers trying to get to the bottom of it
all and taking a very long time about it.
not surprisingly, the guides graphically enticing description of the general
state of affairs on this planet has proved to be astonishingly popular amongst

hitch-hikers who allow themselves to be guided by it, and so it has simply
never been taken out, and it is therefore left to latter-day travellers to find out
for themselves that todays modern brequinda in the city state of avalars is
now little more than concrete, strip joints and dragon burger bars.98

chapter 21.



the night in islington was sweet and fragrant.
there were, of course, no fuolornis fire dragons about in the alley, but if any
had chanced by they might just as well have sloped off across the road for a
pizza, for they were not going to be needed.
had an emergency cropped up while they were still in the middle of their
american hots with extra anchovy they could always have sent across a mes-
sage to put dire straits on the stereo, which is now known to have much the
same effect.
no, said fenchurch, not yet.
arthur put dire straits on the stereo. fenchurch pushed ajar the upstairs
front door to let in a little more of the sweet fragrant night air. they both sat
on some of the furniture made out of cushions, very close to the open bottle
of champagne.
no, said fenchurch, not till youve found out whats wrong with me, which
bit. but i suppose, she added very, very, very quietly, that we may as well
start with where your hand is now.
arthur said, so which way do i go?
down, said fenchurch, on this occasion.
he moved his hand.
down, she said, is in fact the other way.
oh yes.
mark knopfler has an extraordinary ability to make a schecter custom stra-
tocaster hoot and sing like angels on a saturday night, exhausted from being
good all week and needing a stiff beer - which is not strictly relevant at this
point since the record hadnt yet got to that bit, but there will be too much
else going on when it does, and furthermore the chronicler does not intend to
sit here with a track list and a stopwatch, so it seems best to mention it now
while things are still moving slowly.100

chapter 22.

and so we come, said arthur, to your knee. there is something terribly
and tragically wrong with your left knee.
my left knee, said fenchurch, is absolutely fine.
do it is.
did you know that ...
what?
ahm, its all right. i can tell you do. no, keep going.
so it has to be something to do with your feet ...
she smiled in the dim light, and wriggled her shoulders noncommittally against
the cushions. since there are cushions in the universe, on squornshellous beta
to be exact, two worlds in from the swampland of the mattresses, that actively
enjoy being wriggled against, particularly if its noncommittally because of the
syncopated way in which the shoulders move, its a pity they werent there.
they werent, but such is life.
arthur held her left foot in his lap and looked it over carefully. all kinds of
stuff about the way her dress fell away from her legs was making it difficult
for him to think particularly clearly at this point.
i have to admit, he said, that i really dont know what im looking for.
youll know when you find it, she said. really you will. there was a
slight catch in her voice. its not that one.
feeling increasingly puzzled, arthur let her left foot down on the floor and
moved himself around so that he could take her right foot. she moved for-
ward, put her arms round and kissed him, because the record had got to that
bit which, if you knew the record, you would know made it impossible not to
do this.
then she gave him her right foot.
he stroked it, ran his fingers round her ankle, under her toes, along her instep,
could find nothing wrong with it.
she watched him with great amusement, laughed and shook her head.
no, dont stop, she said, but its not that one now.
arthur stopped, and frowned at her left foot on the floor.
dont stop.
he stroked her right foot, ran his fingers around her ankle, under her toes,
along her instep and said, you mean its something to do with which leg im
holding ...?
she did another of the shrugs which would have brought such joy into the life
of a simple cushion from squornshellous beta.
he frowned.
pick me up, she said quietly.
he let her right foot down to the floor and stood up. so did she. he picked

101

her up in his arms and they kissed again. this went on for a while, then she
said, now put me down again.
still puzzled, he did so.
well?
she looked at him almost challengingly.
so whats wrong with my feet? she said.
arthur still did not understand. he sat on the floor, then got down on his
hands and knees to look at her feet, in situ, as it were, in their normal habitat.
and as he looked closely, something odd struck him. he pit his head right
down to the ground and peered. there was a long pause. he sat back heavily.
yes, he said, i see whats wrong with your feet. they dont touch the
ground.
so ... so what do you think ...?
arthur looked up at her quickly and saw the deep apprehension making her
eyes suddenly dark. she bit her lip and was trembling.
what do ... she stammered. are you ...? she shook the hair forwards
over her eyes that were filling with dark fearful tears.
he stood up quickly, put his arms around her and gave her a single kiss.
perhaps you can do what i can do, he said, and walked straight out of her
upstairs front door.
the record got to the good bit.

102

chapter 22.



the battle raged on about the star of xaxis. hundreds of the fierce and hor-
ribly beweaponed zirzla ships had now been smashed and wrenched to atoms
by the withering forces the huge silver xaxisian ship was able to deploy.
part of the moon had gone too, blasted away by those same blazing forceguns
that ripped the very fabric of space as they passed through it.
the zirzla ships that remained, horribly beweaponed though they were, were
now hopelessly outclassed by the devastating power of the xaxisian ship, and
were fleeing for cover behind the rapidly disintegrating moon, when the xax-
isian ship, in hurtling pursuit behind them, suddenly announced that it needed
a holiday and left the field of battle.
all was redoubled fear and consternation for a moment, but the ship was gone.
with the stupendous powers at its command it flitted across vast tracts of ir-
rationally shaped space, quickly, effortlessly, and above all, quietly.
deep in his greasy, smelly bunk, fashioned out of a maintenance hatchway,
ford prefect slept among his towels, dreaming of old haunts. he dreamed at
one point in his slumbers of new york.
in his dream he was walking late at night along the east side, beside the
river which had become so extravagantly polluted that new lifeforms were now
emerging from it spontaneously, demanding welfare and voting rights.
one of those now floated past, waving. ford waved back.
the thing thrashed to the shore and struggled up the bank.
hi, it said, ive just been created. im completely new to the universe in
all respects. is there anything you can tell me?
phew, said ford, a little nonplussed, i can tell you where some bars are, i
guess.
what about love and happiness. i sense deep needs for things like that, it
said, waving its tentacles. got any leads there?
you can get some like what you require, said ford, on seventh avenue.104

chapter 23.

i instinctively feel, said the creature, urgently, that i need to be beautiful.
am i?
youre pretty direct, arent you?
no point in mucking about. am i?
to me? said ford. no. but listen, he added after a moment, most people
make out, you know. are there and like you down there?
search me, buster, said the creature, as i said, im new here. life is entirely
strange to me. whats it like?
here was something that ford felt he could speak about with authority.
life, he said, is like a grapefruit.
er, how so?
well, its sort of orangey-yellow and dimpled on the outside, wet and squidgy
in the middle. its got pips inside, too. oh, and some people have half a one
for breakfast.
is there anyone else out there i can talk to?
i expect so, said ford. ask a policeman.
deep in his bunk, ford prefect wriggled and turned on to his other side.
it wasnt his favourite type of dream because it didnt have eccentrica gal-
lumbits, the triple-breasted whore of eroticon vi in it, whom many of his
dreams did feature. but at least it was a dream. at least he was asleep.



luckily there was a strong updraft in the alley because arthur hadnt done
this sort of thing for a while, at least, not deliberately, and deliberately is
exactly the way you are not meant to do it.
he swung down sharply, nearly catching himself a nasty crack on the jaw with
the doorstep and tumbled through the air, so suddenly stunned with what a
profoundly stupid thing he had just done that he completely forgot the bit
about hitting the ground and didnt.
a nice trick, he thought to himself, if you can do it.
the ground was hanging menacingly above his head.
he tried not to think about the ground, what an extraordinarily big thing it
was and how much it would hurt him if it decided to stop hanging there and
suddenly fell on him. he tried to think nice thoughts about lemurs instead,
which was exactly the right thing to do because he couldnt at that moment
remember precisely what a lemur was, if it was one of those things that sweep
in great majestic herds across the plains of wherever it was or if that was wilde-
beests, so it was a tricky kind of thing to think nice thoughts about without
simply resorting to an icky sort of general well-disposedness towards things,
and all this kept his mind well occupied while his body tried to adjust to the
fact that it wasnt touching anything.
a mars bar wrapper fluttered down the alleyway.
after a seeming moment of doubt and indecision it eventually allowed the wind
to ease it, fluttering, between him and the ground.
arthur ...
the ground was still hanging menacingly above his head, and he thought it
was probably time to do something about that, such as fall away from it, which
is what he did. slowly. very, very slowly.
as he fell slowly, very, very slowly, he closed his eyes - carefully, so as not to
jolt anything.106

chapter 24.

the feel of his eyes closing ran down his whole body. once it had reached his
feet, and the whole of his body was alerted to the fact that his eyes were now
closed and was not panicked by it, he slowly, very, very slowly, revolved his
body one way and his mind the other.
that should sort the ground out.
he could feel the air clear about him now, breezing around him quite cheer-
fully, untroubled by his being there, and slowly, very, very slowly, as from a
deep and distant sleep, he opened his eyes.
he had flown before, of course, flown many times on krikkit until all the
birdtalk had driven him scatty, but this was different.
here he was on his own world, quietly, and without fuss, beyond a slight trem-
bling which could have been attributable to a number of things, being in the
air.
ten or fifteen feet below him was the hard tarmac and a few yards off to the
right the yellow street lights of upper street.
luckily the alleyway was dark since the light which was supposed to see it
through the night was on an ingenious timeswitch which meant it came on
just before lunchtime and went off again as the evening was beginning to draw
in. he was, therefore, safely shrouded in a blanket of dark obscurity.
he slowly, very, very slowly, lifted his head to fenchurch, who was standing in
silent breathless amazement, silhouetted in her upstairs doorway.
her face was inches from his.
i was about to ask you, she said in a low trembly voice, what you were
doing. but then i realized that i could see what you were doing. you were
flying. so it seemed, she went on after a slight wondering pause, like a bit
of a silly question.
arthur said, can you do it?
no.
would you like to try?
she bit her lip and shook her head, not so much to say no, but just in sheer
bewilderment. she was shaking like a leaf.
its quite easy, urged arthur, if you dont know how. thats the important
bit. be not at all sure how youre doing it.
just to demonstrate how easy it was he floated away down the alley, fell up-
wards quite dramatically and bobbed back down to her like a banknote on a
breath of wind.
ask me how i did that.
how ... did you do that?
no idea. not a clue.
she shrugged in bewilderment. so how can i ...?

107

arthur bobbed down a little lower and held out his hand.
i want you to try, he said, to step on my hand. just one foot.
what?
try it.
nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if she was trying to step on
the hand of someone who was floating in front of her in midair, she stepped
on to his hand.
now the other.
what?
take the weight off your back foot.
i cant.
try it.
like this?
like that.
nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if - she stopped telling her-
self what what she was doing was like because she had a feeling she didnt
altogether want to know.
she fixed her eyes very very firmly on the guttering of the roof of the decrepit
warehouse opposite which had been annoying her for weeks because it was
clearly going to fall off and she wondered if anyone was going to do anything
about it or whether she ought to say something to somebody, and didnt think
for a moment about the fact that she was standing on the hands of someone
who wasnt standing on anything at all.
now, said arthur, take your weight off your left foot.
she thought that the warehouse belonged to the carpet company who had their
offices round the corner, and took the weight off her left foot, so she should
probably go and see them about the gutter.
now, said arthur, take the weight off your right foot.
i cant.
try.
she hadnt seen the guttering from quite this angle before, and it looked to her
now as if as well as the mud and gunge up there there might also be a birds
nest. if she leaned forward just a little and took her weight off her right foot,
she could probably see it more clearly.
arthur was alarmed to see that someone down in the alley was trying to steal
her bicycle. he particularly didnt want to get involved in an argument at the
moment and hoped that the guy would do it quietly and not look up.
he had the quiet shifty look of someone who habitually stole bicycles in alleys
and habitually didnt expect to find their owners hovering several feet above
them. he was relaxed by both these habits, and went about his job with

108

chapter 24.

purpose and concentration, and when he found that the bike was unarguably
bound by hoops of tungsten carbide to an iron bar embedded in concrete, he
peacefully bent both its wheels and went on his way.
arthur let out a long-held breath.
see what a piece of eggshell i have found you, said fenchurch in his ear.



those who are regular followers of the doings of arthur dent may have received
an impression of his character and habits which, while it includes the truth
and, of course, nothing but the truth, falls somewhat short, in its composition,
of the whole truth in all its glorious aspects.
and the reasons for this are obvious. editing, selection, the need to balance
that which is interesting with that which is relevant and cut out all the tedious
happenstance.
like this for instance. arthur dent went to bed. he went up the stairs, all
fifteen of them, opened the door, went into his room, took off his shoes and
socks and then all the rest of his clothes one by one and left them in a neatly
crumpled heap on the floor. he put on his pyjamas, the blue ones with the
stripe. he washed his face and hands, cleaned his teeth, went to the lavatory,
realized that he had once again got this all in the wrong order, had to wash his
hands again and went to bed. he read for fifteen minutes, spending the first
ten minutes of that trying to work out where in the book he had got to the
previous night, then he turned out the light and within a minute or so more
was asleep.
it was dark. he lay on his left side for a good hour.
after that he moved restlessly in his sleep for a moment and then turned over
to sleep on his right side. another hour after this his eyes flickered briefly and
he slightly scratched his nose, though there was still a good twenty minutes to
go before he turned back on to his left side. and so he whiled the night away,
sleeping.
at four he got up and went to the lavatory again. he opened the door to the
lavatory ... and so on.
its guff. it doesnt advance the action. it makes for nice fat books such as the
american market thrives on, but it doesnt actually get you anywhere. you
dont, in short, want to know.110

chapter 25.

but there are other omissions as well, beside the teethcleaning and trying to
find fresh socks variety, and in some of these people have often seemed inordi-
nately interested.
what, they want to know, about all that stuff off in the wings with arthur
and trillian, did that ever get anywhere?
to which the answer is, of course, mind your own business.
and what, they say, was he up to all those nights on the planet krikkit? just
because the planet didnt have fuolornis fire dragons or dire straits doesnt
mean that everyone just sat up every night reading.
or to take a more specific example, what about the night after the committee
meeting party on prehistoric earth, when arthur found himself sitting on a
hillside watching the moon rise over the softly burning trees in company with
a beautiful young girl called mella, recently escaped from a lifetime of staring
every morning at a hundred nearly identical photographs of moodily lit tubes
of toothpaste in the art department of an advertising agency on the planet
golgafrincham. what then? what happened next? and the answer is, of
course, that the book ended.
the next one didnt resume the story till five years later, and you can, claim
some, take discretion too far. this arthur dent, comes the cry from the
furthest reaches of the galaxy, and has even now been found inscribed on a
mysterious deep space probe thought to originate from an alien galaxy at a
distance too hideous to contemplate, what is he, man or mouse? is he inter-
ested in nothing more than tea and the wider issues of life? has he no spirit?
has he no passion? does he not, to put it in a nutshell, fuck?
those who wish to know should read on. others may wish to skip on to the
last chapter which is a good bit and has marvin in it.



arthur dent allowed himself for an unworthy moment to think, as they drifted
up, that he very much hoped that his friends who had always found him pleas-
ant but dull, or more latterly, odd but dull, were having a good time in the
pub, but that was the last time, for a while, that he thought of them.
they drifted up, spiralling slowly around each other, like sycamore seeds falling
from sycamore trees in the autumn, except going the other way.
and as they drifted up their minds sang with the ecstatic knowledge that ei-
ther what they were doing was completely and utterly and totally impossible
or that physics had a lot of catching up to do.
physics shook its head and, looking the other way, concentrated on keeping
the cars going along the euston road and out towards the westway flyover,
on keeping the streetlights lit and on making sure that when somebody on
baker street dropped a cheeseburger it went splat upon the ground.
dwindling headily beneath them, the beaded strings of light of london - lon-
don, arthur had to keep reminding himself, not the strangely coloured fields
of krikkit on the remote fringes of the galaxy, lighted freckles of which faintly
spanned the opening sky above them, but london - swayed, swaying and turn-
ing, turned.
try a swoop, he called to fenchurch.
what?
her voice seemed strangely clear but distant in all the vast empty air. it was
breathy and faint with disbelief - all those things, clear, faint, distant, breathy,
all at the same time.
were flying ... she said.
a trifle, called arthur, think nothing of it. try a swoop.
a sw-
her hand caught his, and in a second her weight caught it too, and stunningly,
she was gone, tumbling beneath him, clawing wildly at nothing.112

chapter 26.

physics glanced at arthur, and clotted with horror he was gone too, sick with
giddy dropping, every part of him screaming but his voice.
they plummeted because this was london and you really couldnt do this sort
of thing here.
he couldnt catch her because this was london, and not a million miles from
here, seven hundred and fifty-six, to be exact, in pisa, galileo had clearly
demonstrated that two falling bodies fell at exactly the same rate of accelera-
tion irrespective of their relative weights.
they fell.
arthur realized as he fell, giddily and sickeningly, that if he was going to hang
around in the sky believing everything that the italians had to say about
physics when they couldnt even keep a simple tower straight, that they were
in dead trouble, and damn well did fall faster than fenchurch.
he grappled her from above, and fumbled for a tight grip on her shoulders. he
got it.
fine. they were now falling together, which was all very sweet and romantic,
but didnt solve the basic problem, which was that they were falling, and the
ground wasnt waiting around to see if he had any more clever tricks up his
sleeve, but was coming up to meet them like an express train.
he couldnt support her weight, he hadnt anything he could support it with
or against. the only thing he could think was that they were obviously going
to die, and if he wanted anything other than the obvious to happen he was
going to have to do something other than the obvious. here he felt he was on
familiar territory.
he let go of her, pushed her away, and when she turned her face to him in a
gasp of stunned horror, caught her little finger with his little finger and swung
her back upwards, tumbling clumsily up after her.
shit, she said, as she sat panting and breathless on absolutely nothing at
all, and when she had recovered herself they fled on up into the night.
just below cloud level they paused and scanned where they had impossibly
come. the ground was something not to regard with any too firm or steady
an eye, but merely to glance at, as it were, in passing.
fenchurch tried some little swoops, daringly, and found that if she judged
herself just right against a body of wind she could pull off some really quite
dazzling ones with a little pirouette at the end, followed by a little drop which
made her dress billow around her, and this is where readers who are keen to
know what marvin and ford prefect have been up to all this while should look
ahead to later chapters, because arthur now could wait no longer and helped
her take it off.
it drifted down and away whipped by the wind until it was a speck which

113

finally vanished, and for various complicated reasons revolutionized the life of
a family on hounslow, over whose washing line it was discovered draped in the
morning.
in a mute embrace, they drifted up till they were swimming amongst the misty
wraiths of moisture that you can see feathering around the wings of an aero-
plane but never feel because you are sitting warm inside the stuffy aeroplane
and looking through the little scratchy perspex window while somebody elses
son tries patiently to pour warm milk into your shirt.
arthur and fenchurch could feel them, wispy cold and thin, wreathing round
their bodies, very cold, very thin. they felt, even fenchurch, now protected
from the elements by only a couple of fragments from marks and spencer, that
if they were not going to let the force of gravity bother them, then mere cold
or paucity of atmosphere could go and whistle.
the two fragments from marks and spencer which, as fenchurch rose now
into the misty body of the clouds, arthur removed very, very slowly, which is
the only way its possible to do it when youre flying and also not using your
hands, went on to create considerable havoc in the morning in, respectively,
counting from top to bottom, isleworth and richmond.
they were in the cloud for a long time, because it was stacked very high, and
when finally they emerged wetly above it, fenchurch slowly spinning like a
starfish lapped by a rising tidepool, they found that above the clouds is where
the night get seriously moonlit.
the light is darkly brilliant. there are different mountains up there, but they
are mountains, with their own white arctic snows.
they had emerged at the top of the high-stacked cumulo-nimbus, and now be-
gan lazily to drift down its contours, as fenchurch eased arthur in turn from
his clothes, prised him free of them till all were gone, winding their surprised
way down into the enveloping whiteness.
she kissed him, kissed his neck, his chest, and soon they were drifting on,
turning slowly, in a kind of speechless t-shape, which might have caused even
a fuolornis fire dragon, had one flown past, replete with pizza, to flap its
wings and cough a little.
there were, however, no fuolornis fire dragons in the clouds nor could there
be for, like the dinosaurs, the dodos, and the greater drubbered wintwock of
stegbartle major in the constellation fraz, and unlike the boeing 747 which is
in plentiful supply, they are sadly extinct, and the universe shall never know
their like again.
the reason that a boeing 747 crops up rather unexpectedly in the above list
is not unconnected with the fact that something very similar happened in the
lives of arthur and fenchurch a moment or two later.

114

chapter 26.

they are big things, terrifyingly big. you know when one is in the air with
you. there is a thunderous attack of air, a moving wall of screaming wind, and
you get tossed aside, if you are foolish enough to be doing anything remotely
like what arthur and fenchurch were doing in its close vicinity, like butterflies
in the blitz.
this time, however, there was a heart-sickening fall or loss of nerve, a re-
grouping moments later and a wonderful new idea enthusiastically signalled
through the buffeting noise.
mrs e. kapelsen of boston, massachusetts was an elderly lady, indeed, she
felt her life was nearly at an end. she had seen a lot of it, been puzzled by
some, but, she was a little uneasy to feel at this late stage, bored by too much.
it had all been very pleasant, but perhaps a little too explicable, a little too
routine.
with a sigh she flipped up the little plastic window shutter and looked out
over the wing.
at first she thought she ought to call the stewardess, but then she thought no,
damn it, definitely not, this was for her, and her alone.
by the time her two inexplicable people finally slipped back off the wing and
tumbled into the slipstream she had cheered up an awful lot.
she was mostly immensely relieved to think that virtually everything that any-
body had ever told her was wrong.
the following morning arthur and fenchurch slept very late in the alley de-
spite the continual wail of furniture being restored.
the following night they did it all over again, only this time with sony walk-
men.



this is all very wonderful, said fenchurch a few days later. but i do need
to know what has happened to me. you see, theres this difference between
us. that you lost something and found it again, and i found something and
lost it. i need to find it again.
she had to go out for the day, so arthur settled down for a day of telephoning.
murray bost henson was a journalist on one of the papers with small pages
and big print. it would be pleasant to be able to say that he was none the
worse for it, but sadly, this was not the case. he happened to be the only
journalist that arthur knew, so arthur phoned him anyway.
arthur my old soup spoon, my old silver turreen, how particularly stunning
to hear from you. someone told me youd gone off into space or something.
murray had his own special kind of conversation language which he had in-
vented for his own use, and which no one else was able to speak or even to
follow. hardly any of it meant anything at all. the bits which did mean
anything were often so wonderfully buried that no one could ever spot them
slipping past in the avalance of nonsense. the time when you did find out,
later, which bits he did mean, was often a bad time for all concerned.
what? said arthur.
just a rumour my old elephant tusk, my little green baize card table, just a
rumour. probably means nothing at all, but i may need a quote from you.
nothing to say, just pub talk.
we thrive on it, my old prosthetic limb, we thrive on it. plus it would fit like
a whatsit in one of those other things with the other stories of the week, so
it could be just to have you denying it. excuse me, something has just fallen
out of my ear.
there was a slight pause, at the end of which murray bost henson came back
on the line sounding genuinely shaken.
just remembered, he said, what an odd evening i had last night. anyway116

chapter 27.

my old, i wont say what, how do you feel about having ridden on halleys
comet?
i havent, said arthur with a suppressed sigh, ridden on halleys comet.
ok, how do you feel about not having ridden on halleys comet?
pretty relaxed, murray.
there was a pause while murray wrote this down.
good enough for me, arthur, good enough for ethel and me and the chickens.
fits in with the general weirdness of the week. week of the weirdos, were
thinking of calling it. good, eh?
very good.
got a ring to it. first we have this man it always rains on.
what?
its the absolute stocking top truth. all documented in his little black book,
it all checks out at every single funloving level. the met office is going ice
cold thick banana whips, and funny little men in white coats are flying in from
all over the world with their little rulers and boxes and drip feeds. this man
is the bees knees, arthur, he is the wasps nipples. he is, i would go so far
as to say, the entire set of erogenous zones of every major flying insect of the
western world. were calling him the rain god. nice, eh?
i think ive met him.
good ring to it. what did you say?
i may have met him. complains all the time, yes?
incredible! you met the rain god?
if its the same guy. i told him to stop complaining and show someone his
book.
there was an impressed pause from murray bost hensons end of the phone.
well, you did a bundle. an absolute bundle has absolutely been done by
you. listen, do you know how much a tour operator is paying that guy not to
go to malaga this year? i mean forget irrigating the sahara and boring stuff
like that, this guy has a whole new career ahead of him, just avoiding places
for money. the mans turning into a monster, arthur, we might even have to
make him win the bingo.
listen, we may want to do a feature on you, arthur, the man who made the
rain god rain. got a ring to it, eh?
a nice one, but ...
we may need to photograph you under a garden shower, but thatll be ok.
where are you?
er, im in islington. listen, murray ...
islington!
yes ...

117

well, what about the real weirdness of the week, the real seriously loopy stuff.
you know anything about these flying people?
no.
you must have. this is the real seethingly crazy one. this is the real meat-
balls in the batter. locals are phoning in all the time to say theres this couple
who go flying nights. weve got guys down in our photo labs working through
the night to put together a genuine photograph. you must have heard.
no.
arthur, where have you been? oh, space, right, i got your quote. but that
was months ago. listen, its night after night this week, my old cheesegrater,
right on your patch. this couple just fly around the sky and start doing all
kinds of stuff. and i dont mean looking through walls or pretending to be
box girder bridges. you dont know anything?
no.
arthur, its been almost inexpressibly delicious conversing with you, chum-
bum, but i have to go. ill send the guy with the camera and the hose. give
me the address, im ready and writing.
listen, murray, i called to ask you something.
i have a lot to do.
i just wanted to find out something about the dolphins.
no story. last years news. forget em. theyre gone.
its important.
listen, no one will touch it. you cant sustain a story, you know, when the
only news is the continuing absence of whatever the storys about. not our
territory anyway, try the sundays. maybe theyll run a little whatever hap-
pened to whatever happened to the dolphins story in a couple of years,
around august. but whats anybody going to do now? dolphins still gone?
continuing dolphin absence? dolphins - further days without them?
the story dies, arthur.
it lies down and kicks its little feet in the air and
presently goes to the great golden spike in the sky, my old fruitbat.
murray, im not interested in whether its a story. i just want to find out how
i can get in touch with that guy in california who claims to know something
about it. i thought you might know.

118

chapter 27.



people are beginning to talk, said fenchurch that evening, after they had
hauled her cello in.
not only talk, said arthur, but print, in big bold letters under the bingo
prizes. which is why i thought id better get these.
he showed her the long narrow booklets of airline tickets.
arthur! she said, hugging him. does that mean you managed to talk to
him?
i have had a day, said arthur, of extreme telephonic exhaustion. i have
spoken to virtually every department of virtually every paper in fleet street,
and i finally tracked his number down.
youve obviously been working hard, youre drenched with sweat poor dar-
ling.
not with sweat, said arthur wearily. a photographers just been. i tried
to argue, but - never mind, the point is, yes.
you spoke to him.
i spoke to his wife. she said he was too weird to come to the phone right now
and could i call back.
he sat down heavily, realized he was missing something and went to the fridge
to find it.
want a drink?
would commit murder to get one. i always know im in for a tough time
when my cello teacher looks me up and down and says, ah yes, my dear, i
think a little tchaikovsky today..
i called again, said arthur, and she said that he was 3.2 light years from
the phone and i should call back.
ah.
i called again. she said the situation had improved. he was now a mere 2.6
light years from the phone but it was still a long way to shout.120

chapter 28.

you dont suppose, said fenchurch, doubtfully, that theres anyone else we
can talk to?
it gets worse, said arthur, i spoke to someone on a science magazine who
actually knows him, and he said that john watson will not only believe, but
will actually have absolute proof, often dictated to him by angels with golden
beards and green wings and doctor scholl footwear, that the months most
fashionable silly theory is true. for people who question the validity of these
visions he will triumphantly produce the clogs in question, and thats as far
as you get.
i didnt realize it was that bad, said fenchurch quietly. she fiddled listlessly
with the tickets.
i phoned mrs watson again, said arthur. her name, by the way, and you
may wish to know this, is arcane jill.
i see.
im glad you see. i thought you mightnt believe any of this, so when i called
her this time i used the telephone answering machine to record the call.
he went across to the telephone machine and fiddled and fumed with all its
buttons for a while, because it was the one which was particularly recom-
mended by which? magazine and is almost impossible to use without going
mad.
here it is, he said at last, wiping the sweat from his brow.
the voice was thin and crackly with its journey to a geostationary satellite
and back, but it was also hauntingly calm.
perhaps i should explain, arcane jill watsons voice said, that the phone
is in fact in a room that he never comes into.
its in the asylum you see.
wonko the sane does not like to enter the asylum and so he does not. i feel
you should know this because it may save you phoning. if you would like to
meet him, this is very easily arranged. all you have to do is walk in. he will
only meet people outside the asylum.
arthurs voice, at its most mystified: im sorry, i dont understand. where
is the asylum?
where is the asylum? arcane jill watson again. have you ever read the
instructions on a packet of toothpicks?
on the tape, arthurs voice had to admit that he had not.
you may want to do that. you may find that it clarifies things for you a
little. you may find that it indicates to you where the asylum is. thank
you.
the sound of the phone line went dead. arthur turned the machine off.
well, i suppose we can regard that as an invitation, he said with a shrug. i
actually managed to get the address from the guy on the science magazine.

121

fenchurch looked up at him again with a thoughtful frown, and looked at the
tickets again.
do you think its worth it? she said.
well, said arthur, the one thing that everyone i spoke to agrees on, apart
from the fact that they all thought he was barking mad, is that he does know
more than any man living about dolphins.

122

chapter 28.



this is an important announcement. this is flight 121 to los angeles. if
your travel plans today do not include los angeles, now would be the perfect
time to disembark.124

chapter 29.



they rented a car in los angeles from one of the places that rents out cars
that other people have thrown away.
getting it to go round corners is a bit of a problem, said the guy behind the
sunglasses as he handed them the keys, sometimes its simpler just to get out
and find a car thats going in that direction.
they stayed for one night in a hotel on sunset boulevard which someone had
told them they would enjoy being puzzled by.
everyone there is either english or odd or both. theyve got a swimming
pool where you can go and watch english rock stars reading language, truth
and logic for the photographers.
it was true. there was one and that was exactly what he was doing.
the garage attendant didnt think much of their car, but that was fine because
they didnt either.
late in the evening they drove through the hollywood hills along mulholland
drive and stopped to look out first over the dazzling sea of floating light that
is los angeles, and later stopped to look across the dazzling sea of floating
light that is the san fernando valley. they agreed that the sense of dazzle
stopped immediately at the back of their eyes and didnt touch any other part
of them and came away strangely unsatisfied by the spectacle. as dramatic
seas of light went, it was fine, but light is meant to illuminate something, and
having driven through what this particularly dramatic sea of light was illumi-
nating they didnt think much of it.
they slept late and restlessly and awoke at lunchtime when it was stupidly
hot.
they drove out along the freeway to santa monica for their first look at the
pacific ocean, the ocean which wonko the sane spent all his days and a good
deal of his nights looking at.
someone told me, said fenchurch, that they once overheard two old ladies126

chapter 30.

on this beach, doing what were doing, looking at the pacific ocean for the
first time in their lives. and apparently, after a long pause, one of them said
to the other, you know, its not as big as i expected.
their mood lifted further as the sun began to move down the western half
of the sky, and by the time they were back in their rattling car and driving
towards a sunset that no one of any sensibility would dream of building a city
like los angeles on front of, they were suddenly feeling astonishingly and irra-
tionally happy and didnt even mind that the terrible old car radio would only
play two stations, and those simultaneously. so what, they were both playing
good rock and roll.
i know he will be able to help us, said fenchurch determinedly. i know he
will. whats his name again, that he likes to be called?
wonko the sane.
i know that he will be able to help us.
arthur wondered if he would and hoped that he would, and hoped that what
fenchurch had lost could be found here, on this earth, whatever this earth
might prove to be.
he hoped, as he had hoped continually and fervently since the time they had
talked together on the banks of the serpentine, that he would not be called
upon to try to remember something that he had very firmly and deliberately
buried in the furthest recesses of his memory, where he hoped it would cease
to nag at him.
in santa barbara they stopped at a fish restaurant in what seemed to be a
converted warehouse.
fenchurch had red mullet and said it was delicious.
arthur had a swordfish steak and said it made him angry.
he grabbed a passing waitress by the arm and berated her.
whys this fish so bloody good? he demanded, angrily.
please excuse my friend, said fenchurch to the startled waitress. i think
hes having a nice day at last.



if you took a couple of david bowies and stuck one of the david bowies on the
top of the other david bowie, then attached another david bowie to the end
of each of the arms of the upper of the first two david bowies and wrapped
the whole business up in a dirty beach robe you would then have something
which didnt exactly look like john watson, but which those who knew him
would find hauntingly familiar.
he was tall and he gangled.
when he sat in his deckchair gazing at the pacific, not so much with any
kind of wild surmise any longer as with a peaceful deep dejection, it was a
little difficult to tell exactly where the deckchair ended and he began, and
you would hesitate to put your hand on, say, his forearm in case the whole
structure suddenly collapsed with a snap and took your thumb off.
but his smile when he turned it on you was quite remarkable. it seemed to
be composed of all the worst things that life can do to you, but which, when
he briefly reassembled them in that particular order on his face, made you
suddenly fee, oh. well thats all right then.
when he spoke, you were glad that he used the smile that made you feel like
that pretty often.
oh yes, he said, they come and see me. they sit right here. they sit right
where youre sitting.
he was talking of the angels with the golden beards and green wings and dr
scholl sandals.
they eat nachos which they say they cant get where they come from. they
do a lot of coke and are very wonderful about a whole range of things.
do they? said arthur. are they? so, er ... when is this then? when do
they come?
he gazed out at the pacific as well. there were little sandpipers running
along the margin of the shore which seemed to have this problem: they needed128

chapter 31.

to find their food in the sand which a wave had just washed over, but they
couldnt bear to get their feet wet. to deal with this problem they ran with an
odd kind of movement as if theyd been constructed by somebody very clever
in switzerland.
fenchurch was sitting on the sand, idly drawing patterns in it with her fingers.
weekends, mostly, said wonko the sane, on little scooters. they are great
machines. he smiled.
i see, said arthur. i see.
a tiny cough from fenchurch attracted his attention and he looked round at
her. she had scratched a little stick figure drawing in the sand of the two
of them in the clouds. for a moment he thought she was trying to get him
excited, then he realized that she was rebuking him. who are we, she was
saying, to say hes mad?
his house was certainly peculiar, and since this was the first thing that fenchurch
and arthur had encountered it would help to know what it was like.
what it was like was this:
it was inside out.
actually inside out, to the extent that they had to park on the carpet.
all along what one would normally call the outer wall, which was decorated
in a tasteful interior-designed pink, were bookshelves, also a couple of those
odd three-legged tables with semi-circular tops which stand in such a way as
to suggest that someone just dropped the wall straight through them, and
pictures which were clearly designed to soothe.
where it got really odd was the roof.
it folded back on itself like something that maurits c. escher, had he been
given to hard nights on the town, which is no part of this narratives purpose to
suggest was the case, though it is sometimes hard, looking at his pictures, par-
ticularly the one with the awkward steps, not to wonder, might have dreamed
up after having been on one, for the little chandeliers which should have been
hanging inside were on the outside pointing up.
confusing.
the sign above the front door said, come outside, and so, nervously, they
had.
inside, of course, was where the outside was. rough brickwork, nicely done
painting, guttering in good repair, a garden path, a couple of small trees, some
rooms leading off.
and the inner walls stretched down, folded curiously, and opened at the end
as if, by an optical illusion which would have had maurits c. escher frowning
and wondering how it was done, to enclose the pacific ocean itself.
hello, said john watson, wonko the sane.

129

good, they thought to themselves, hello is something we can cope with.
hello, they said, and all surprisingly was smiles.
for quite a while he seemed curiously reluctant to talk about the dolphins,
looking oddly distracted and saying, i forget ... whenever they were men-
tioned, and had shown them quite proudly round the eccentricities of his house.
it gives me pleasure, he said, in a curious kind of way, and does nobody
any harm, he continued, that a competent optician couldnt correct.
they liked him. he had an open, engaging quality and seemed able to mock
himself before anybody else did.
your wife, said arthur, looking around, mentioned some toothpicks. he
said it with a hunted look, as if he was worried that she might suddenly leap
out from behind the door and mention them again.
wonko the sane laughed. it was a light easy laugh, and sounded like one he
had used a lot before and was happy with.
ah yes, he said, thats to so with the day i finally realized that the world
had gone totally mad and built the asylum to put it in, poor thing, and hoped
it would get better.
this was the point at which arthur began to feel a little nervous again.
here, said wonko the sane, we are outside the asylum. he pointed again
at the rough brickwork, the pointing and the guttering. go through that
door, he pointed at the first door through which they had originally entered,
and you go into the asylum. ive tried to decorate it nicely to keep the in-
mates happy, but theres very little one can do. i never go in there now myself.
if ever i am tempted, which these days i rarely am, i simply look at the sign
written over the door and shy away.
that one? said fenchurch, pointing, rather puzzled, at a blue plaque with
some instructions written on it.
yes. they are the words that finally turned me into the hermit i have now
become. it was quite sudden. i saw them, and i knew what i had to do.
the sign said:
hold stick near centre of its length. moisten pointed end in mouth. insert in
tooth space, blunt end next to gum. use gentle in-out motion.
it seemed to me, said wonko the sane, that any civilization that had so
far lost its head as to need to include a set of detailed instructions for use in
a packet of toothpicks, was no longer a civilization in which i could live and
stay sane.
he gazed out at the pacific again, as if daring it to rave and gibber at him,
but it lay there calmly and played with the sandpipers.
and in case it crossed your mind to wonder, as i can see how it possibly
might, i am completely sane. which is why i call myself wonko the sane, just

130

chapter 31.

to reassure people on this point. wonko is what my mother called me when
i was a kid and clumsy and knocked things over, and sane is what i am, and
how, he added, with one of his smiles that made you feel, oh. well thats
all right then. i intend to remain. shall we go on to the beach and see what
we have to talk about?
they went out on to the beach, which was where he started talking about
angels with golden beards and green wings and dr scholl sandals.
about the dolphins ... said fenchurch gently, hopefully.
i can show you the sandals, said wonko the sane.
i wonder, do you know ...
would you like me to show you, said wonko the sane, the sandals? i have
them. ill get them. they are made by the dr scholl company, and the angels
say that they particularly suit the terrain they have to work in. they say they
run a concession stand by the message. when i say i dont know what that
means they say no, you dont, and laugh. well, ill get them anyway.
as he walked back towards the inside, or the outside depending on how you
looked at it, arthur and fenchurch looked at each other in a wondering and
slightly desperate sort of way, then each shrugged and idly drew figures in the
sand.
how are the feet today? said arthur quietly.
ok. it doesnt feel so odd in the sand. or in the water. the water touches
them perfectly. i just think this isnt our world.
she shrugged.
what do you think he meant, she said, by the message?
i dont know, said arthur, though the memory of a man called prak who
laughed at him continuously kept nagging at him.
when wonko returned he was carrying something that stunned arthur. not
the sandals, they were perfectly ordinary wooden- bottomed sandals.
i just thought youd like to see, he said, what angels wear on their feet.
just out of curiousity. im not trying to prove anything, by the way. im a
scientist and i know what constitutes proof. but the reason i call myself by
my childhood name is to remind myself that a scientist must also be absolutely
like a child. if he sees a thing, he must say that he sees it, whether it was what
he thought he was going to see or not. see first, think later, then test. but
always see first. otherwise you will only see what you were expecting. most
scientists forget that. ill show you something to demonstrate that later. so,
the other reason i call myself wonko the sane is so that people will think i
am a fool. that allows me to say what i see when i see it. you cant possibly
be a scientist if you mind people thinking that youre a fool. anyway, i also
thought you might like to see this.

131

this was the thing that arthur had been stunned to see him carrying, for it
was a wonderful silver-grey glass fish bowl, seemingly identical to the one in
arthurs bedroom.
arthur had been trying for some thirty seconds now, without success, to say,
where did you get that? sharply, and with a gasp in his voice.
finally his time had come, but he missed it by a millisecond.
where did you get that? said fenchurch, sharply and with a gasp in her
voice.
arthur glanced at fenchurch sharply and with a gasp in his voice said, what?
have you seen one of these before?
yes, she said, ive got one. or at least i did have. russell nicked it to put
his golfballs in. i dont know where it came from, just that i was angry with
russell for nicking it. why, have you got one?
yes, it was ...
they both became aware that wonko the sane was glancing sharply back-
wards and forwards between them, and trying to get a gasp in edgeways.
you have one of those too? he said to both of them.
yes. they both said it.
he looked long and calmly at each of them, then he held up the bowl to catch
the light of the californian sun.
the bowl seemed almost to sing with the sun, to chime with the intensity of
its light, and cast darkly brilliant rainbows around the sand and upon them.
he turned it, and turned it. they could see quite clearly in the fine tracery of
its etchwork the words so long, and thanks for all the fish.
do you know, asked wonko quietly, what it is?
they each shook their heads slowly, and with wonder, almost hypnotized by
the flashing of the lightning shadows in the grey glass.
it is a farewell gift from the dolphins, said wonko in a low quiet voice, the
dolphins whom i loved and studied, and swam with, and fed with fish, and
even tried to learn their language, a task which they seemed to make impossi-
bly difficult, considering the fact that i now realize they were perfectly capable
of communicating in ours if they decided they wanted to.
he shook his head with a slow, slow smile, and then looked again at fenchurch,
and then at arthur.
have you ... he said to arthur, what have you done with yours? may i ask
you that?
er, i keep a fish in it, said arthur, slightly embarrassed. i happened to
have this fish i was wondering what to do with, and, er, there was this bowl.
he tailed off.
youve done nothing else? no, he said, if you had, you would know. he

132

chapter 31.

shook his head again.
my wife kept wheatgerm in ours, resumed wonko, with some new tone in
his voice, until last night ...
what, said arthur slowly and hushedly, happened last night?
we ran out of wheatgerm, said wonko, evenly. my wife, he added, has
gone to get some more. he seemed lost with his own thoughts for a moment.
and what happened then? said fenchurch, in the same breathless tone.
i washed it, said wonko. i washed it very carefully, very very carefully,
removing every last speck of wheatgerm, then i dried it slowly with a lint-free
cloth, slowly, carefully, turning it over and over. then i held it to my ear.
have you ... have you held one to your ear?
they both shook their heads, again slowly, again dumbly.
perhaps, he said, you should.



the deep roar of the ocean.
the break of waves on further shores than thought can find.
the silent thunders of the deep.
and from among it, voices calling, and yet not voices, humming trillings,
wordlings, the half-articulated songs of thought.
greetings, waves of greetings, sliding back down into the inarticulate, words
breaking together.
a crash of sorrow on the shores of earth.
waves of joy on - where? a world indescribably found, indescribably arrived
at, indescribably wet, a song of water.
a fugue of voices now, clamouring explanations, of a disaster unavertable, a
world to be destroyed, a surge of helplessness, a spasm of despair, a dying fall,
again the break of words.
and then the fling of hope, the finding of a shadow earth in the implications
of enfolded time, submerged dimensions, the pull of parallels, the deep pull,
the spin of will, the hurl and split of it, the flight. a new earth pulled into
replacement, the dolphins gone.
then stunningly a single voice, quite clear.
this bowl was brought to you by the campaign to save the humans. we bid
you farewell.
and then the sound of long, heavy, perfectly grey bodies rolling away into an
unknown fathomless deep, quietly giggling.134

chapter 32.



that night they stayed outside the asylum and watched tv from inside it.
this is what i wanted you to see, said wonko the sane when the news came
around again, an old colleague of mine. hes over in your country running an
investigation. just watch.
it was a press conference.
im afraid i cant comment on the name rain god at this present time, and
we are calling him an example of a spontaneous para- causal meteorological
phenomenon.
can you tell us what that means?
im not altogether sure. lets be straight here.
if we find something we
cant understand we like to call it something you cant understand, or indeed
pronounce. i mean if we just let you go around calling him a rain god, then
that suggests that you know something we dont, and im afraid we couldnt
have that.
no, first we have to call it something which says its ours, not yours, then
we set about finding some way of proving its not what you said it is, but
something we say it is.
and if it turns out that youre right, youll still be wrong, because we will
simply call him a ... er supernormal ...
- not paranormal or supernatural
because you think you know what those mean now, no, a supernormal in-
cremental precipitation inducer. well probably want to shove a quasi in
there somewhere to protect ourselves. rain god! huh, never heard such non-
sense in my life. admittedly, you wouldnt catch me going on holiday with
him. thanks, thatll be all for now, other than to say hi! to wonko if hes
watching.136

chapter 33.



on the way home there was a woman sitting next to them on the plane who
was looking at them rather oddly.
they talked quietly to themselves.
i still have to know, said fenchurch, and i strongly feel that you know
something that youre not telling me.
arthur sighed and took out a piece of paper.
do you have a pencil? he said. she dug around and found one.
what are you doing, sweetheart? she said, after he had spent twenty min-
utes frowning, chewing the pencil, scribbling on the paper, crossing things out,
scribbling again, chewing the pencil again and grunting irritably to himself.
trying to remember an address someone once gave me.
your life would be an awful lot simpler, she said, if you bought yourself an
address book.
finally he passed the paper to her.
you look after it, he said.
she looked at it. among all the scratchings and crossings out were the words
quentulus quazgar mountains. sevorbeupstry. planet of preliumtarn. sun-
zarss. galactic sector qq7 active j gamma.
and whats there?
apparently, said arthur, its gods final message to his creation.
that sounds a bit more like it, said fenchurch. how do we get there?
you really ...?
yes, said fenchurch firmly, i really want to know.
arthur looked out of the scratchy little perspex window at the open sky out-
side.
excuse me, said the woman who had been looking at them rather oddly,
suddenly, i hope you dont think im rude.
i get so bored on these long
flights, its nice to talk to somebody. my names enid kapelsen, im from138

chapter 34.

boston. tell me, do you fly a lot?



they went to arthurs house in the west country, shoved a couple of towels
and stuff in a bag, and then sat down to do what every galactic hitch hiker
ends up spending most of his time doing.
they waited for a flying saucer to come by.
friend of mine did this for fifteen years, said arthur one night as they sat
forlornly watching the sky.
who was that?
called ford prefect.
he caught himself doing something he had never really expected to do again.
he wondered where ford prefect was.
by an extraordinary coincidence, the following day there were two reports in
the paper, one concerning the most astonishing incidents with a flying saucer,
and the other about a series of unseemly riots in pubs.
ford prefect turned up the day after that looking hung over and complaining
that arthur never answered the phone.
in fact he looked extremely ill, not merely as if hed been pulled through a
hedge backwards, but as if the hedge was being simultaneously pulled back-
wards through a combine harvester. he staggered into arthurs sitting room,
waving aside all offers of support, which was an error, because the effort caused
him to lose his balance altogether and arthur had eventually to drag him to
the sofa.
thank you, said ford, thank you very much. have you ... he said, and
fell asleep for three hours.
... the faintest idea he continued suddenly, when he revived, how hard it
is to tap into the british phone system from the pleiades? i can see that you
havent, so ill tell you, he said, over the very large mug of black coffee that
you are about to make me.
he followed arthur wobbily into the kitchen.140

chapter 35.

stupid operators keep asking you where youre calling from and you try and
tell them letchworth and they say you couldnt be if youre coming in on that
circuit. what are you doing?
making you some black coffee.
oh. ford seemed oddly disappointed. he looked about the place forlornly.
whats this? he said.
rice crispies.
and this?
paprika.
i see, said ford, solemnly, and put the two items back down, one on top of
the other, but that didnt seem to balance properly, so he put the other on top
of the one and that seemed to work.
a little space-lagged, he said. what was i saying?
about not phoning from letchworth.
i wasnt. i explained this to the lady. bugger letchworth, i said, if thats
your attitude. i am in fact calling from a sales scoutship of the sirius cyber-
netics corporation, currently on the sub-light-speed leg of a journey between
the stars known on your world, though not necessarily to you, dear lady. -
i said dear lady, explained ford prefect, because i didnt want her to be
offended by my implication that she was an ignorant cretin ...
tactful, said arthur dent.
exactly, said ford, tactful.
he frowned.
space-lag, he said, is very bad for sub-clauses. youll have to assist me
again, he continued, by reminding me what i was talking about.
between the stars, said arthur, known on your world, though not neces-
sarily to you, dear lady, as ...
pleiades epsilon and pleiades zeta, concluded ford triumphantly. this
conversation lark is quite gas isnt it?
have some coffee.
thank you, no.
and the reason, i said, why i am bothering you with it
rather than just dialling direct as i could, because we have some pretty sophis-
ticated telecommunications equipment out here in the pleiades, i can tell you,
is that the penny pinching son of a starbeast piloting this son of a starbeast
spaceship insists that i call collect. can you believe that?
and could she?
i dont know. she had hung up, said ford, by this time. so! what do you
suppose, he asked fiercely, i did next?
ive no idea, ford, said arthur.
pity, said ford, i was hoping you could remind me.

i really hate those

141

guys you know. they really are the creeps of the cosmos, buzzing around
the celestial infinite with their junky little machines that never work properly
or, when they do, perform functions that no sane man would require of them
and, he added savagely, go beep to tell you when theyve done it!
this was perfectly true, and a very respectable view widely held by right think-
ing people, who are largely recognizable as being right thinking people by the
mere fact that they hold this view.
the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy, in a moment of reasoned lucidity
which is almost unique among its current tally of five million, nine hundred
and seventy-five thousand, five hundred and nine pages, says of the sirius
cybernetics corporation product that it is very easy to be blinded to the
essential uselessness of them by the sense of achievement you get from getting
them to work at all.
in other words - and this is the rock solid principle on which the whole of
the corporations galaxy-wide success is founded - their fundamental design
flaws are completely hidden by their superficial design flaws.
and this guy, ranted ford, was on a drive to sell more of them! his five-
year mission to seek out and explore strange new worlds, and sell advanced
music substitute systems to their restaurants, elevators and wine bars! or if
they didnt have restaurants, elevators and wine bars yet, to artificially accel-
erate their civilization growth until they bloody well did have! wheres that
coffee!
i threw it away.
make some more. i have now remembered what i did next. i saved civiliza-
tion as we know it. i knew it was something like that.
he stumbled determinedly back into the sitting room, where he seemed to
carry on talking to himself, tripping over the furniture and making beep beep
noises.
a couple of minutes later, wearing his very placid face, arthur followed him.
ford looked stunned.
where have you been? he demanded.
making some coffee, said arthur, still wearing his very placid face. he had
long ago realized that the only way of being in fords company successfully
was to keep a large stock of very placid faces and wear them at all times.
you missed the best bit! raged ford. you missed the bit where i jumped
the guy! now, he said, i shall have to jump him, all over him!
he hurled himself recklessly at a chair and broke it.
it was better, he said sullenly, last time, and waved vaguely in the direc-
tion of another broken chair which he had already got trussed up on the dining
table.

142

chapter 35.

i see, said arthur, casting a placid eye over the trussed up wreckage, and,
er, what are all the ice cubes for?
what? screamed ford. what? you missed that bit too? thats the sus-
pended animation facility! i put the guy in the suspended animation facility.
well i had to didnt i?
so it would seem, said arthur, in his placid voice.
dont touch that!!! yelled ford.
arthur, who was about to replace the phone, which was for some mysterious
reason lying on the table, off the hook, paused, placidly.
ok, said ford, calming down, listen to it.
arthur put the phone to his ear.
its the speaking clock, he said.
beep, beep, beep, said ford, is exactly what is being heard all over that
guys ship, while he sleeps, in the ice, going slowly round a little-known moon
of sesefras magna. the london speaking clock!
i see, said arthur again, and decided that now was the time to ask the big
one.
why? he said, placidly.
with a bit of luck, said ford, the phone bill will bankrupt the buggers.
he threw himself, sweating, on to the sofa.
anyway, he said, dramatic arrival dont you think?



the flying saucer in which ford prefect had stowed away had stunned the
world.
finally there was no doubt, no possibility of mistake, no hallucinations, no
mysterious cia agents found floating in reservoirs.
this time it was real, it was definite. it was quite definitely definite.
it had come down with a wonderful disregard for anything beneath it and
crushed a large area of some of the most expensive real estate in the world,
including much of harrods.
the thing was massive, nearly a mile across, some said, dull silver in colour,
pitted, scorched and disfigured with the scars of unnumbered vicious space
battles fought with savage forces by the light of suns unknown to man.
a hatchway opened, crashed down through the harrods food halls, demol-
ished harvey nicholls, and with a final grinding scream of tortured architec-
ture, toppled the sheraton park tower.
after a long, heart-stopping moment of internal crashes and grumbles of rend-
ing machinery, there marched from it, down the ramp, an immense silver robot,
a hundred feet tall.
it held up a hand.
i come in peace, it said, adding after a long moment of further grinding,
take me to your lizard.
ford prefect, of course, had an explanation for this, as he sat with arthur and
watched the non-stop frenetic news reports on the television, none of which
had anything to say other than to record that the thing had done this amount
of damage which was valued at that amount of billions of pounds and had
killed this totally other number of people, and then say it again, because the
robot was doing nothing more than standing there, swaying very slightly, and
emitting short incomprehensible error messages.
it comes from a very ancient democracy, you see ...144

chapter 36.

you mean, it comes from a world of lizards?
no, said ford, who by this time was a little more rational and coherent
than he had been, having finally had the coffee forced down him, nothing so
simple. nothing anything like so straightforward. on its world, the people are
people. the leaders are lizards. the people hate the lizards and the lizards
role the people.
odd, said arthur, i thought you said it was a democracy.
i did, said ford. it is.
so, said arthur, hoping he wasnt sounding ridiculously obtuse, why dont
people get rid of the lizards?
it honestly doesnt occur to them, said ford. theyve all got the vote, so
they all pretty much assume that the government theyve voted in more or less
approximates to the government they want.
you mean they actually vote for the lizards?
oh yes, said ford with a shrug, of course.
but, said arthur, going for the big one again, why?
because if they didnt vote for a lizard, said ford, the wrong lizard might
get in. got any gin?
what?
i said, said ford, with an increasing air of urgency creeping into his voice,
have you got any gin?
ill look. tell me about the lizards.
ford shrugged again.
some people say that the lizards are the best thing that ever happened to
them, he said. theyre completely wrong of course, completely and utterly
wrong, but someones got to say it.
but thats terrible, said arthur.
listen, bud, said ford, if i had one altairan dollar for every time i heard
one bit of the universe look at another bit of the universe and say thats
terrible i wouldnt be sitting here like a lemon looking for a gin. but i havent
and i am. anyway, what are you looking so placid and moon-eyed for? are
you in love?
arthur said yes, he was, and said it placidly.
with someone who knows where the gin bottle is? do i get to meet her?
he did because fenchurch came in at that moment with a pile of newspapers
shed been into the village to buy. she stopped in astonishment at the wreck-
age on the table and the wreckage from betelgeuse on the sofa.
wheres the gin? said ford to fenchurch. and to arthur, what happened
to trillian by the way?
er, this is fenchurch, said arthur, awkwardly. there was nothing with

145

trillian, you must have seen her last.
oh, yeah, said ford, she went off with zaphod somewhere. they had some
kids or something. at least, he added, i think thats what they were. za-
phods calmed down a lot you know.
really? said arthur, clustering hurriedly round fenchurch to relieve her of
the shopping.
yeah, said ford, at least one of his heads is now saner than an emu on
acid.
arthur, who is this? said fenchurch.
ford prefect, said arthur. i may have mentioned him in passing.

146

chapter 36.



for a total of three days and nights the giant silver robot stood in stunned
amazement straddling the remains of knightsbridge, swaying slightly and try-
ing to work out a number of things.
government deputations came to see it, ranting journalists by the truckload
asked each other questions on the air about what they thought of it, flights
of fighter bombers tried pathetically to attack it - but no lizards appeared. it
scanned the horizon slowly.
at night it was at its most spectacular, floodlit by the teams of television
crews who covered it continuously as it continuously did nothing.
it thought and thought and eventually reached a conclusion.
it would have to send out its service robots.
it should have thought of that before, but it was having a number of problems.
the tiny flying robots came screeching out of the hatchway one afternoon in
a terrifying cloud of metal. they roamed the surrounding terrain, frantically
attacking some things and defending others.
one of them at last found a pet shop with some lizards, but it instantly de-
fended the pet shop for democracy so savagely that little in the area survived.
a turning point came when a crack team of flying screechers discovered the
zoo in regents park, and most particularly the reptile house.
learning a little caution from their previous mistakes in the petshop, the flying
drills and fretsaws brought some of the larger and fatter iguanas to the giant
silver robot, who tried to conduct high-level talks with them.
eventually the robot announced to the world that despite the full, frank and
wide-ranging exchange of views the high level talks had broken down, the
lizards had been retired, and that it, the robot would take a short holiday
somewhere, and for some reason selected bournemouth.
ford prefect, watching it on tv, nodded, laughed, and had another beer.
immediate preparations were made for its departure.148

chapter 37.

the flying toolkits screeched and sawed and drilled and fried things with light
throughout that day and all through the night time, and in the morning,
stunningly, a giant mobile gantry started to roll westwards on several roads
simultaneously with the robot standing on it, supported within the gantry.
westward it crawled, like a strange carnival buzzed around by its servants and
helicopters and news coaches, scything through the land until at last it came
to bournemouth, where the robot slowly freed itself from it transport systems
embraces and went and lay for ten days on the beach.
it was, of course, by far the most exciting thing that had ever happened to
bournemouth.
crowds gathered daily along the perimeter which was staked out and guarded
as the robots recreation area, and tried to see what it was doing.
it was doing nothing. it was lying on the beach. it was lying a little awkwardly
on its face.
it was a journalist from a local paper who, late one night, managed to do what
no one else in the world had so far managed, which was to strike up a brief
intelligible conversation with one of the service robots guarding the perimeter.
it was an extraordinary breakthrough.
i think theres a story in it, confided the journalist over a cigarette shared
through the steel link fence, but it needs a good local angle. ive got a little
list of questions here, he went on, rummaging awkwardly in an inner pocket,
perhaps you could get him, it, whatever you call him, to run through them
quickly.
the little flying ratchet screwdriver said it would see what it cold do and
screeched off.
a reply was never forthcoming.
curiously, however, the questions on the piece of paper more or less exactly
matched the questions that were going through the massive battle-scarred in-
dustrial quality circuits of the robots mind. they were these:
how do you feel about being a robot?
how does it feel to be from outer space? and
how do you like bournemouth?
early the following day things started to be packed up and within a few days
it became apparent that the robot was preparing to leave for good.
the point is, said fenchurch to ford, can you get us on board?
ford looked wildly at his watch.
i have some serious unfinished business to attend to, he exclaimed.



crowds thronged as close as they could to the giant silver craft, which wasnt
very. the immediate perimeter was fenced off and patrolled by the tiny flying
service robots. staked out around that was the army, who had been completely
unable to breach that inner perimeter, but were damned if anybody was going
to breach them. they in turn were surrounded by a cordon of police, though
whether they were there to protect the public from the army or the army from
the public, or to guarantee the giant ships diplomatic immunity and prevent
it getting parking tickets was entirely unclear and the subject of much debate.
the inner perimeter fence was now being dismantled. the army stirred un-
comfortably, uncertain of how to react to the fact that the reason for their
being there seemed as if it was simply going to get up and go.
the giant robot had lurched back aboard the ship at lunchtime, and now it
was five oclock in the afternoon and no further sign had been seen of it. much
had been heard - more grindings and rumblings from deep within the craft,
the music of a million hideous malfunctions; but the sense of tense expecta-
tion among the crowd was born of the fact that they tensely expected to be
disappointed. this wonderful extraordinary thing had come into their lives,
an now it was simply going to go without them.
two people were particularly aware of this sensation. arthur and fenchurch
scanned the crowd anxiously, unable to find ford prefect in it anywhere, or
any sign that he had the slightest intention of being there.
how reliable is he? asked fenchurch in a sinking voice.
how reliable? said arthur. he gave a hollow laugh. how shallow is the
ocean? he said. how cold is the sun?
the last parts of the robots gantry transport were being carried on board,
and the few remaining sections of the perimeter fence were now stacked at
the bottom of the ramp waiting to follow them. the soldiers on guard round
the ramp bristled meaningfully, orders were barked back and forth, hurried150

chapter 38.

conferences were held, but nothing, of course, could be done about any of it.
hopelessly, and with no clear plan now, arthur and fenchurch pushed forward
through the crowd, but since the whole crowd was also trying to push forward
through the crowd, this got them nowhere.
and within a few minutes more nothing remained outside the ship, every last
link of the fence was aboard. a couple of flying fret saws and a spirit level
seemed to do one last check around the site, and then screamed in through the
giant hatchway themselves.
a few seconds passed.
the sounds of mechanical disarray from within changed in intensity, and slowly,
heavily, the huge steel ramp began to lift itself back out of the harrods food
halls. the sound that accompanied it was the sound of thousands of tense,
excited people being completely ignored.
hold it!
a megaphone barked from a taxi which screeched to a halt on the edge of the
milling crowd.
there has been, barked the megaphone, a major scientific break-in! through.
breakthrough, it corrected itself. the door flew open and a small man from
somewhere in the vicinity of betelgeuse leapt out wearing a white coat.
hold it! he shouted again, and this time brandished a short squad black rod
with lights on it. the lights winked briefly, the ramp paused in its ascent, and
then in obedience to the signals from the thumb (which half the electronic
engineers in the galaxy are constantly trying to find fresh ways of jamming,
while the other half are constantly trying to find fresh ways of jamming the
jamming signals), slowly ground its way downwards again.
ford prefect grabbed his megaphone from out of the taxi and started bawling
at the crowd through it.
make way, he shouted, make way, please, this is a major scientific break-
through. you and you, get the equipment from the taxi.
completely at random he pointed at arthur and fenchurch, who wrestled their
way back out of the crowd and clustered urgently round the taxi.
all right, i want you to clear a passage, please, for some important pieces of
scientific equipment, boomed ford. just everybody keep calm. its all under
control, theres nothing to see. it is merely a major scientific breakthrough.
keep calm now. important scientific equipment. clear the way.
hungry for new excitement, delighted at this sudden reprieve from disappoint-
ment, the crowd enthusiastically fell back and started to open up.
arthur was a little surprised to see what was printed on the boxes of important
scientific equipment in the back of the taxi.
hang your coat over them, he muttered to fenchurch as he heaved them out

151

to her. hurriedly he manoeuvred out the large supermarket trolley that was
also jammed against the back seat. it clattered to the ground, and together
they loaded the boxes into it.
clear a path, please, shouted ford again. everythings under proper sci-
entific control.
he said youd pay, said the taxi-driver to arthur, who dug out some notes
and paid him. there was the distant sound of police sirens.
move along there, shouted ford, and no one will get hurt.
the crowd surged and closed behind them again, as frantically they pushed
and hauled the rattling supermarket trolley through the rubble towards the
ramp.
its all right, ford continued to bellow. theres nothing to see, its all over.
none of this is actually happening.
clear the way, please, boomed a police megaphone from the back of the
crowd. theres been a break-in, clear the way.
breakthrough, yelled ford in competition. a scientific breakthrough!
this is the police! clear the way!
scientific equipment! clear the way!
police! let us through!
walkmen! yelled ford, and pulled half a dozen miniature tape players from
his pockets and tossed them into the crowd. the resulting seconds of utter
confusion allowed them to get the supermarket trolley to the edge of the ramp,
and to haul it up on to the lip of it.
hold tight, muttered ford, and released a button on his electronic thumb.
beneath them, the huge ramp juddered and began slowly to heave its way
upwards.
ok, kids, he said as the milling crowd dropped away beneath them and they
started to lurch their way along the tilting ramp into the bowels of the ship,
looks like were on our way.

152

chapter 38.



arthur dent was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound of gunfire.
being careful not to wake fenchurch, who was still managing to sleep fitfully,
he slid his way out of the maintenance hatchway which they had fashioned
into a kind of bunk for themselves, slung himself down the access ladder and
prowled the corridors moodily.
they were claustrophobic and ill-lit. the lighting circuits buzzed annoyingly.
this wasnt it, though.
he paused and leaned backwards as a flying power drill flew past him down
the dim corridor with a nasty screech, occasionally clanging against the walls
like a confused bee as it did so.
that wasnt it either.
he clambered through a bulkhead door and found himself in a larger corridor.
acrid smoke was drifting up from one end so he walked towards the other.
he came to an observation monitor let into the wall behind a plate of tough-
ened but still badly scratched perspex.
would you turn it down please? he said to ford prefect who was crouching
in front of it in the middle of a pile of bits of video equipment hed taken from
a shop window in tottenham court road, having first hurled a small brick
through it, and also a nasty heap of empty beer cans.
shhhh! hissed ford, and peered with manic concentration at the screen. he
was watching the magnificent seven.
just a bit, said arthur.
no! shouted ford. were just getting to the good bit! listen, i finally
got it all sorted out, voltage levels, line conversion, everything, and this is the
good bit!
with a sigh and a headache, arthur sat down beside him and watched the
good bit. he listened to fords whoops and yells and yeehays as placidly as
he could.154

chapter 39.

ford, he said eventually, when it was all over, and ford was hunting through
a stack of cassettes for the tape of casablanca, how come, if ...
this is the big one, said ford. this is the one i came back for. do you
realize i never saw it all through? always i missed the end.
i saw half of
it again the night before the vogons came. when they blew the place up i
thought id never get to see it. hey, what happened with all that anyway?
just life, said arthur, and plucked a beer from a six-pack.
oh, that again, said ford. i thought it might be something like that. i
prefer this stuff, he said as ricks bar flickered on to the screen. how come
if what?
what?
you started to say, how come if ...
how come if youre so rude about the earth, that you ... oh never mind, lets
just watch the movie.
exactly, said ford.



there remains little still to tell.
beyond what used to be known as the limitless lightfields of flanux until
the grey binding fiefdoms of saxaquine were discovered lying behind them,
lie the grey binding fiefdoms of saxaquine. within the grey binding fief-
doms of saxaquine lies the star named zarss, around which orbits the planet
preliumtarn in which is the land of sevorbeupstry, and it was to the land of
sevorbeupstry that arthur and fenchurch came at last, a little tired by the
journey.
and in the land of sevorbeupstry, they came to the great red plain of rars,
which was bounded on the south side by the quentulus quazgar mountains,
on the further side of which, according to the dying words of prak, they would
find in thirty- foot-high letters of fire gods final message to his creation.
according to prak, if arthurs memory saved him right, the place was guarded
by the lajestic vantrashell of lob, and so, after a manner, it proved to be. he
was a little man in a strange hat and he sold them a ticket.
keep to the left, please, he said, keep to the left, and hurried on past them
on a little scooter.
they realized they were not the first to pass that way, for the path that led
around the left of the great plain was well-worn and dotted with booths. at
one they bought a box of fudge, which had been baked in an oven in a cave in
the mountain, which was heated by the fire of the letters that formed gods
final message to his creation. at another they bought some postcards. the
letters had been blurred with an airbrush, so as not to spoil the big surprise!
it said on the reverse.
do you know what the message is? they asked the wizened little lady in the
booth.
oh yes, she piped cheerily, oh yes!
she waved them on.156

chapter 40.

every twenty miles or so there was a little stone hut with showers and sanitary
facilities, but the going was tough, and the high sun baked down on the great
red plain, and the great red plain rippled in the heat.
is it possible, asked arthur at one of the larger booths, to rent one of those
little scooters? like the one lajestic ventrawhatsit had.
the scooters, said the little lady who was serving at an ice cream bar, are
not for the devout.
oh well, thats easy then, said fenchurch, were not particularly devout.
were just interested.
then you must turn back now, said the little lady severely, and when they
demurred, sold them a couple of final message sunhats and a photograph of
themselves with their arms tight around each other on the great red plain of
rars.
they drank a couple of sodas in the shade of the booth and then trudged out
into the sun again.
were running out of border cream, said fenchurch after a few more miles.
we can go to the next booth, or we can return to the previous one which is
nearer, but means we have to retrace our steps again.
they stared ahead at the distant black speck winking in the heat haze; they
looked behind themselves. they elected to go on.
they then discovered that they were not only not the first ones to make this
journey, but that they were not the only ones making it now.
some way ahead of them an awkward low shape was heaving itself wretchedly
along the ground, stumbling painfully slowly, half- limping, half-crawling.
it was moving so slowly that before too long they caught the creature up and
could see that it was made of worn, scarred and twisted metal.
it groaned at them as they approached it, collapsing in the hot dry dust.
so much time, it groaned, oh so much time. and pain as well, so much of
that, and so much time to suffer it in too. one or the other on its own i could
probably manage. its the two together that really get me down. oh hello,
you again.
marvin? said arthur sharply, crouching down beside it. is that you?
you were always one, groaned the aged husk of the robot, for the super-
intelligent question, werent you?
what is it? whispered fenchurch in alarm, crouching behind arthur, and
grasping on to his arm. hes sort of an old friend, said arthur. i ...
friend! croaked the robot pathetically. the word died away in a kind of
crackle and flakes of rust fell out of its mouth. youll have to excuse me while
i try and remember what the word means. my memory banks are not what
they were you know, and any word which falls into disuse for a few zillion years

157

has to get shifted down into auxiliary memory back-up. ah, here it comes.
the robots battered head snapped up a bit as if in thought.
hmm, he said, what a curious concept.
he thought a little longer.
no, he said at last, dont think i ever came across one of those. sorry, cant
help you there.
he scraped a knee along pathetically in the dust, an then tried to twist himself
up on his misshapen elbows.
is there any last service you would like me to perform for you perhaps? he
asked in a kind of hollow rattle. a piece of paper that perhaps you would
like me to pick up for you? or maybe you would like me, he continued, to
open a door?
his head scratched round in its rusty neck bearings and seemed to scan the
distant horizon.
dont seem to be any doors around at present, he said, but im sure that if
we waited long enough, someone would build one. and then, he said slowly
twisting his head around to see arthur again, i could open it for you. im
quite used to waiting you know.
arthur, hissed fenchurch in his ear sharply, you never told me of this.
what have you done to this poor creature?
nothing, insisted arthur sadly, hes always like this ...
ha! snapped marvin. ha! he repeated. what do you know of always?
you say always to me, who, because of the silly little errands your organic
lifeforms keep on sending me through time on, am now thirty-seven times older
than the universe itself? pick your words with a little more care, he coughed,
and tact.
he rasped his way through a coughing fit and resumed.
leave me, he said, go on ahead, leave me to struggle painfully on my way.
my time at last has nearly come. my race is nearly run. i fully expect, he
said, feebly waving them on with a broken finger, to come in last. it would
be fitting. here i am, brain the size ...
between them they picked him up despite his feeble protests and insults. the
metal was so hot it nearly blistered their fingers, but he weighed surprisingly
little, and hung limply between their arms.
they carried him with them along the path that ran along the left of the great
red plain of rars toward the encircling mountains of quentulus quazgar.
arthur attempted to explain to fenchurch, but was too often interrupted by
marvins dolorous cybernetic ravings.
they tried to see if they could get him some spare parts at one of the booths,
but marvin would have none of it.

158

chapter 40.

im all spare parts, he droned.
let me be! he groaned.
every part of me, he moaned, has been replaced at least fifty times ...
except ... he seemed almost imperceptibly to brighten for a moment. his
head bobbed between them with the effort of memory. do you remember,
the first time you ever met me, he said at last to arthur. i had been given
the intellect- stretching task of taking you up to the bridge? i mentioned to
you that i had this terrible pain in all the diodes down my left side? that i
had asked for them to be replaced but they never were?
he left a longish pause before he continued. they carried him on between
them, under the baking sun that hardly ever seemed to move, let alone set.
see if you can guess, said marvin, when he judged that the pause had be-
come embarrassing enough, which parts of me were never replaced? go on,
see if you can guess.
ouch, he added, ouch, ouch, ouch, ouch, ouch.
at last they reached the last of the little booths, set down marvin between
them and rested in the shade. fenchurch bought some cufflinks for russell,
cufflinks that had set in them little polished pebbles which had been picked
up from the quentulus quazgar mountains, directly underneath the letters of
fire in which was written gods final message to his creation.
arthur flipped through a little rack of devotional tracts on the counter, little
meditations on the meaning of the message.
ready? he said to fenchurch, who nodded.
they heaved up marvin between them.
they rounded the foot of the quentulus quazgar mountains, and there was
the message written in blazing letters along the crest of the mountain. there
was a little observation vantage point with a rail built along the top of a
large rock facing it, from which you could get a good view.
it had a little
pay-telescope for looking at the letters in detail, but no one would ever use it
because the letters burned with the divine brilliance of the heavens and would,
if seen through a telescope, have severely damaged the retina and optic nerve.
they gazed at gods final message in wonderment, and were slowly and
ineffably filled with a great sense of peace, and of final and complete un-
derstanding.
fenchurch sighed. yes, she said, that was it.
they had been staring at it for fully ten minutes before they became aware
that marvin, hanging between their shoulders, was in difficulties. the robot
could no longer lift his head, had not read the message. they lifted his head,
but he complained that his vision circuits had almost gone.
they found a coin and helped him to the telescope. he complained and in-

159

sulted them, but they helped him look at each individual letter in turn, the
first letter was a w, the second an e. then there was a gap. an a
followed, then a p, an o and an l.
marvin paused for a rest.
after a few moments they resumed and let him see the o, the g, the i,
the s and the e.
the next two words were for and the. the last one was a long one, and
marvin needed another rest before he could tackle it.
it started with an i, then n then a c. next came an o and an n,
followed by a v, an e, another n and an i.
after a final pause, marvin gathered his strength for the last stretch.
he read the e, the n, the c and at last the final e, and staggered back
into their arms.
i think, he murmured at last, from deep within his corroding rattling thorax,
i feel good about it.
the lights went out in his eyes for absolutely the very last time ever.
luckily, there was a stall nearby where you could rent scooters from guys with
green wings.

160

chapter 40.



epilogue

one of the greatest benefactors of all lifekind was a man who couldnt keep
his mind on the job in hand.
brilliant?
certainly.
one of the foremost genetic engineers of his or any other generation, including
a number he had designed himself?
without a doubt.
the problem was that he was far too interested in things which he shouldnt
be interested in, at least, as people would tell him, not now.
he was also, partly because of this, of a rather irritable disposition.
so when his world was threatened by terrible invaders from a distant star, who
were still a fair way off but travelling fast, he, blart versenwald iii (his name
was blart versenwald iii, which is not strictly relevant, but quite interesting
because - never mind, that was his name and we can talk about why its inter-
esting later), was sent into guarded seclusion by the masters of his race with
instructions to design a breed of fanatical superwarriors to resist and vanquish
the feared invaders, do it quickly and, they told him, concentrate!
so he sat by a window and looked out at a summer lawn and designed and
designed and designed, but inevitably got a little distracted by things, and by
the time the invaders were practically in orbit round them, had come up with
a remarkable new breed of super-fly that could, unaided, figure out how to
fly through the open half of a half-open window, and also an off- switch for
children. celebrations of these remarkable achievements seemed doomed to be
shortlived because disaster was imminent as the alien ships were landing. but
astoundingly, the fearsome invaders who, like most warlike races were only on162

chapter 41. epilogue

the rampage because they couldnt cope with things at home, were stunned by
versenwalds extraordinary breakthroughs, joined in the celebrations and were
instantly prevailed upon to sign a wide-ranging series of trading agreements
and set up a programme of cultural exchanges. and, in an astonishing reversal
of normal practice in the conduct of such matters, everybody concerned lived
happily ever after.
there was a point to this story, but it has temporarily escaped the chroniclers
mind.

mostly harmless

douglas adams

2

anything that, in happening, causes something else to happen, causes

anything that happens, happens.

something else to happen.

anything that, in happening, causes itself to happen again, happens again.

it doesnt necessarily do it in chronological order, though.4



the history of the galaxy has got a little muddled, for a number of reasons:
partly because those who are trying to keep track of it have got a little muddled,
but also because some very muddling things have been happening anyway.
one of the problems has to do with the speed of light and the difficulties in-
volved in trying to exceed it. you cant. nothing travels faster than the speed
of light with the possible exception of bad news, which obeys its own special
laws. the hingefreel people of arkintoofle minor did try to build spaceships
that were powered by bad news but they didnt work particularly well and were
so extremely unwelcome whenever they arrived anywhere that there wasnt re-
ally any point in being there.
so, by and large, the peoples of the galaxy tended to languish in their own
local muddles and the history of the galaxy itself was, for a long time, largely
cosmological.
which is not to say that people werent trying. they tried sending off fleets
of spaceships to do battle or business in distant parts, but these usually took
thousands of years to get anywhere. by the time they eventually arrived,
other forms of travel had been discovered which made use of hyperspace to
circumvent the speed of light, so that whatever battles it was that the slower-
than-light fleets had been sent to fight had already been taken care of centuries
earlier by the time they actually got there .
this didnt, of course, deter their crews from wanting to fight the battles any-
way. they were trained, they were ready, theyd had a couple of thousand
years sleep, theyd come a long way to do a tough job and by zarquon they
were going to do it.
this was when the first major muddles of galactic history set in, with bat-
tles continually re-erupting centuries after the issues they had been fought
over had supposedly been settled. however, these muddles were as nothing
to the ones which historians had to try and unravel once time-travel was dis-6

chapter 1.

covered and battles started pre-erupting hundreds of years before the issues
even arose. when the infinite improbability drive arrived and whole planets
started turning unexpectedly into banana fruitcake, the great history faculty of
the university of maximegalon finally gave up, closed itself down and surren-
dered its buildings to the rapidly growing joint faculty of divinity and water
polo, which had been after them for years.
which is all very well, of course, but it almost certainly means that no one will
ever know for sure where, for instance, the grebulons came from, or exactly
what it was they wanted. and this is a pity, because if anybody had known
anything about them, it is just possible that a most terrible catastrophe would
have been averted - or at least would have had to find a different way to hap-
pen.

click, hum.

the huge grey grebulon reconnaissance ship moved silently through the black
void. it was travelling at fabulous, breath- taking speed, yet appeared, against
the glimmering background of a billion distant stars to be moving not at all.
it was just one dark speck frozen against an infinite granularity of brilliant
night.
on board the ship, everything was as it had been for millennia, deeply dark
and silent.
click, hum.
at least, almost everything.
click, click, hum.
click, hum, click, hum, click, hum.
click, click, click, click, click, hum.
hmmm.
a low level supervising program woke up a slightly higher level supervising
program deep in the ships semi-somnolent cyberbrain and reported to it that
whenever it went click all it got was a hum.
the higher level supervising program asked it what it was supposed to get,
and the low level supervising program said that it couldnt remember exactly,
but thought it was probably more of a sort of distant satisfied sigh, wasnt it?
it didnt know what this hum was. click, hum, click, hum. that was all it
was getting.
the higher level supervising program considered this and didnt like it.
it
asked the low level supervising program what exactly it was supervising and
the low level supervising program said it couldnt remember that either, just
that it was something that was meant to go click, sigh every ten years or so,
which usually happened without fail. it had tried to consult its error look-up

7

table but couldnt find it, which was why it had alerted the higher level su-
pervising program to the problem .
the higher level supervising program went to consult one of its own look-up
tables to find out what the low level supervising program was meant to be
supervising.
it couldnt find the look-up table .
odd.
it looked again. all it got was an error message. it tried to look up the error
message in its error message look-up table and couldnt find that either. it
allowed a couple of nanoseconds to go by while it went through all this again.
then it woke up its sector function supervisor.
the sector function supervisor hit immediate problems. it called its supervis-
ing agent which hit problems too. within a few millionths of a second virtual
circuits that had lain dormant, some for years, some for centuries, were flaring
into life throughout the ship. something, somewhere, had gone terribly wrong,
but none of the supervising programs could tell what it was. at every level,
vital instructions were missing, and the instructions about what to do in the
event of discovering that vital instructions were missing, were also missing.
small modules of software - agents - surged through the logical pathways,
grouping, consulting, re-grouping. they quickly established that the ships
memory, all the way back to its central mission module, was in tatters. no
amount of interrogation could determine what it was that had happened. even
the central mis- sion module itself seemed to be damaged.
this made the whole problem very simple to deal with. replace the central
mission module. there was another one, a backup, an exact duplicate of the
original.
it had to be physically replaced because, for safety reasons, there
was no link whatsoever between the original and its backup. once the central
mission module was replaced it could itself supervise the reconstruction of the
rest of the system in every detail, and all would be well.
robots were instructed to bring the backup central mission module from the
shielded strong room, where they guarded it, to the ships logic chamber for
installation.
this involved the lengthy exchange of emergency codes and protocols as the
robots interrogated the agents as to the authen- ticity of the instructions. at
last the robots were satisfied that all procedures were correct. they unpacked
the backup central mission module from its storage housing, carried it out of
the storage chamber, fell out of the ship and went spinning off into the void.
this provided the first major clue as to what it was that was wrong.
further investigation quickly established what it was that had happened. a
meteorite had knocked a large hole in the ship. the ship had not previously

8

chapter 1.

detected this because the meteorite had neatly knocked out that part of the
ships processing equipment which was supposed to detect if the ship had been
hit by a meteorite.

the first thing to do was to try to seal up the hole. this turned out to
be impossible, because the ships sensors couldnt see that there was a hole,
and the supervisors which should have said that the sensors werent working
properly werent working properly and kept saying that the sensors were fine.
the ship could only deduce the existence of the hole from the fact that the
robots had clearly fallen out of it, taking its spare brain, which would have
enabled it to see the hole, with them.
the ship tried to think intelligently about this, failed, and then blanked out
completely for a bit. it didnt realise it had blanked out, of course, because
it had blanked out. it was merely surprised to see the stars jump. after the
third time the stars jumped the ship finally realised that it must be blanking
out, and that it was time to take some serious decisions.
it relaxed.
then it realised it hadnt actually taken the serious decisions yet and panicked.
it blanked out again for a bit. when it awoke again it sealed all the bulkheads
around where it knew the unseen hole must be.
it clearly hadnt got to its destination yet, it thought, fitfully, but since it no
longer had the faintest idea where its destina- tion was or how to reach it,
there seemed to be little point in continuing. it consulted what tiny scraps of
instructions it could reconstruct from the tatters of its central mission mod-
ule.
your !!!!! !!!!! !!!!! year mission is to !!!!! !!!!! !!!!! !!!!!, !!!!! !!!!! !!!!! !!!!!, land
!!!!!
.....
monitor it. !!!!! !!!!! !!!!!...
all of the rest was complete garbage.
before it blanked out for good the ship would have to pass on those instruc-
tions, such as they were, to its more primitive subsidiary systems.
it must also revive all of its crew.
there was another problem. while the crew was in hibernation, the minds
of all of its members, their memories, their identities and their understanding
of what they had come to do, had all been transferred into the ships central
mission module for safe keeping. the crew would not have the faintest idea of
who they were or what they were doing there. oh well.
just before it blanked out for the final time, the ship realised that its engines
were beginning to give out too.
the ship and its revived and confused crew coasted on under the control of

!!!!! a safe distance !!!!!

!!!!!

, land .....

.....

.....

....

!!!!!

.....

.....

9

its subsidiary automatic systems, which simply looked to land wherever they
could find to land and monitor whatever they could find to monitor.
as far as finding something to land on was concerned, they didnt do very
well. the planet they found was desolately cold and lonely, so achingly far
from the sun that should warm it, that it took all of the envir-o-form ma-
chinery and lifesupport-o- systems they carried with them to render it, or at
least enough parts of it, habitable. there were better planets nearer in, but
the ships strateej-o-mat was obviously locked into lurk mode and chose the
most distant and unobtrusive planet and, further- more, would not be gainsaid
by anybody other than the ships chief strategic officer. since everybody on
the ship had lost their minds no one knew who the chief strategic officer was
or, even if he could have been identified, how he was supposed to go about
gainsaying the ships strateej-o-mat.
as far as finding something to monitor was concerned, though, they hit solid
gold.

10

chapter 1.



one of the extraordinary things about life is the sort of places its prepared to
put up with living. anywhere it can get some kind of a grip, whether its the
intoxicating seas of santraginus v, where the fish never seem to care whatever
the heck kind of direction they swim in, the fire storms of frastra where, they
say, life begins at 40,000 degrees, or just burrowing around in the lower intes-
tine of a rat for the sheer unadulterated hell of it, life will always find a way
of hanging on in somewhere.
it will even live in new york, though its hard to know why. in the winter
time the temperature falls well below the legal minimum, or rather it would
do if anybody had the common sense to set a legal minimum. the last time
anybody made a list of the top hundred character attributes of new yorkers,
common sense snuck in at number 79.
in the summer its too darn hot. its one thing to be the sort of life form that
thrives on heat and finds, as the frastrans do, that the temperature range be-
tween 40,000 and 40,004 is very equable, but its quite another to be the sort of
animal that has to wrap itself up in lots of other animals at one point in your
planets orbit, and then find, half an orbit later, that your skins bubbling.
spring is over-rated. a lot of the inhabitants of new york will honk on might-
ily about the pleasures of spring, but if they actually knew the first thing
about the pleasures of spring they would know of at least five thousand nine
hundred and eighty- three better places to spend it than new york, and thats
just on the same latitude.
fall, though, is the worst. few things are worse than fall in new york. some
of the things that live in the lower intestines of rats would disagree, but most
of the things that live in the lower intestines of rats are highly disagreeable
anyway, so their opinion can and should be discounted. when its fall in new
york, the air smells as if someones been frying goats in it, and if you are keen
to breathe, the best plan is to open a window and stick your head in a building.12

chapter 2.

tricia mcmillan loved new york. she kept on telling herself this over and over
again. the upper west side. yeah. mid town. hey, great retail. soho. the
east village. clothes. books. sushi. italian. delis. yo.
movies. yo also. tricia had just been to see woody allens new movie which
was all about the angst of being neurotic in new york. he had made one or
two other movies that had explored the same theme, and tricia wondered if
he had ever considered moving, but heard that he had set his face against the
idea. so: more movies, she guessed.
tricia loved new york because loving new york was a good career move. it
was a good retail move, a good cuisine move, not a good taxi move or a great
quality of pavement move, but definitely a career move that ranked amongst
the highest and the best. tricia was a tv anchor person, and new york
was where most of the worlds tv was anchored. tricias tv anchoring had
been done exclusively in britain up to that point: regional news, then breakfast
news, early evening news. she would have been called, if the language allowed,
a rapidly rising anchor, but... hey, this is television, what does it matter? she
was a rapidly rising anchor. she had what it took: great hair, a profound
understand- ing of strategic lip gloss, the intelligence to understand the world
and a tiny secret interior deadness which meant she didnt care. everybody
has their moment of great opportunity in life. if you happen to miss the one
you care about, then everything else in life becomes eerily easy.
tricia had only ever missed one opportunity. these days it didnt even make
her tremble quite so much as it used to to think about it. she guessed it was
that bit of her that had gone dead.
nbs needed a new anchor. mo minetti was leaving the us/am breakfast
show to have a baby. she had been offered a mind-bubbling amount of money
to have it on the show, but she had declined, unexpectedly, on grounds of
personal privacy and taste. teams of nbs lawyers had sieved through her
contract to see if these constituted legitimate grounds, but in the end, reluc-
tantly, they had to let her go. this was, for them, particularly galling because
normally reluctantly letting someone go was an expression that had its boot
on quite another foot.
the word was out that maybe, just maybe, a british accent would fit. the
hair, the skin tone and the bridgework would have to be up to american net-
work standards, but there had been a lot of british accents up there thanking
their mothers for their oscars, a lot of british accents singing on broadway,
and some unusually big audiences tuning in to british accents in wigs on mas-
terpiece theatre. british accents were telling jokes on david letterman and
jay leno. nobody understood the jokes but they were really responding to
the accents, so maybe it was time, just maybe. a british accent on us/am.

13

well, hell.
that was why tricia was here. this was why loving new york was a great
career move.
it wasnt, of course, the stated reason. her tv company back in the uk would
hardly have stumped up the air fare and hotel bill for her to go job hunting in
manhattan. since she was chasing something like ten times her present salary,
they might have felt that she could have forked out her own expenses, but
shed found a story, found a pretext, kept very quiet about anything ulterior,
and theyd stumped up for the trip. a business class ticket, of course, but her
face was known and shed smiled herself an upgrade. the right moves had got
her a nice room at the brentwood and here she was, wondering what to do
next.
the word on the street was one thing, making contact was another. she had
a couple of names, a couple of numbers, but all it took was being put on inde-
terminate hold a couple of times and she was back at square one. shed put
out feelers, left messages, but so far none had been returned. the actual job
she had come to do she had done in a morning; the imagined job she was after
was only shimmering tantalisingly on an unreachable horizon.
shit.
she caught a cab from the movie theatre back to the brent- wood. the cab
couldnt get close to the kerb because a big stretch limo was hogging all the
available space and she had to squeeze her way past it. she walked out of the
fetid, goat-frying air and into the blessed cool of the lobby. the fine cotton of
her blouse was sticking like grime to her skin. her hair felt as if shed bought
it at a fairground on a stick. at the front desk she asked if there were any
messages, grimly expecting none. there was one.
oh...
good.
it had worked. she had gone out to the movie specifically in order to make
the phone ring. she couldnt bear sitting in a hotel room waiting.
she wondered. should she open the message down here? her clothes were
itching and she longed to take them all off and just lie on the bed. she had
turned the air conditioning way down to its bottom temperature setting, way
up to its top fan setting. what she wanted more than anything else in the
world at the moment was goose pimples. then a hot shower, then a cool one,
then lying on a towel, on the bed again, drying in the air conditioning. then
reading the message. maybe more goose pimples. maybe all sorts of things.
no. what she wanted more than anything else in the world was a job in amer-
ican television at ten times her current salary. more than anything else in the
world. in the world. what she wanted more than anything else at all was no

14

chapter 2.

longer a live issue.
she sat on a chair in the lobby, under a kentia palm, and opened the little
cellophane-windowed envelope.
please call, it said. not happy, and gave a number. the name was gail
andrews.
gail andrews.
it wasnt a name she was expecting. it caught her unawares. she recognised it,
but couldnt immediately say why. was she andy martins secretary? hilary
basss assistant? martin and bass were the two major contact calls she had
made, or tried to make, at nbs. and what did not happy mean?
not happy?
she was completely bewildered. was this woody allen trying to contact her
under an assumed name? it was a 212 area code number. so it was someone
in new york. who was not happy. well, that narrowed it down a bit, didnt
it?
she went back to the receptionist at the desk.
i have a problem with this message you just gave me, she said. someone i
dont know has tried to call me and says shes not happy.
the receptionist peered at the note with a frown.
do you know this person? he said.
no, tricia said.
hmmm, said the receptionist. sounds like shes not happy about some-
thing.
yes, said tricia.
looks like theres a name here, said the receptionist. gail andrews. do
you know anybody of that name?
no, said tricia.
any idea what shes unhappy about?
no, said tricia.
have you called the number? theres a number here.
no, said tricia, you only just gave me the note. im just trying to get some
more information before i ring back. perhaps i could talk to the person who
took the call?
hmmm, said the receptionist, scrutinising the note carefully. i dont think
we have anybody called gail andrews here.
no, i realise that, said tricia. i just -
im gail andrews.
the voice came from behind tricia. she turned round.
im sorry?
im gail andrews. you interviewed me this morning.

15

oh. oh good heavens yes, said tricia, slightly flustered.
i left the message for you a few hours ago. i hadnt heard so i came by. i
didnt want to miss you.
oh. no. of course, said tricia, trying hard to get up to speed.
i dont know about this, said the receptionist, for whom speed was not an
issue. would you like me to try this number for you now?
no, thatll be fine, thanks, said tricia. i can handle it now.
i can call this room number here for you if thatll help, said the receptionist,
peering at the note again.
no, that wont be necessary, thanks, said tricia. thats my own room
number. im the one the message was for. i think weve sorted this out now.
you have a nice day now, said the receptionist.
tricia didnt particularly want to have a nice day. she was busy.
she also didnt want to talk to gail andrews. she had a very strict cut-off
point as far as fraternising with the christians was concerned. her colleagues
called her interview subjects chris- tians and would often cross themselves
when they saw one walking innocently into the studio to face tricia, particu-
larly if tricia was smiling warmly and showing her teeth.
she turned and smiled frostily, wondering what to do.
gail andrews was a well groomed woman in her mid-forties. her clothes fell
within the boundaries defined by expensive good taste, but were definitely
huddled up at the floatier end of those boundaries. she was an astrologer
- a famous and, if rumour were true, influential astrologer, having allegedly
influenced a number of decisions made by the late president hudson, including
every- thing from which flavour of cream whip to have on which day of the
week, to whether or not to bomb damascus.
tricia had savaged her more than somewhat. not on the grounds of whether
or not the stories about the president were true, that was old hat now. at
the time ms andrews had emphati- cally denied advising president hudson
on anything other than personal, spiritual or dietary matters, which did not,
apparently include the bombing of damascus.
(nothing personal,
damascus! the tabloids had hooted at the time.)
no, this was a neat topical little angle that tricia had come up with about the
whole issue of astrology itself. ms andrews had not been entirely ready for it.
tricia, on the other hand, was not entirely ready for a re-match in the hotel
lobby. what to do?
i can wait for you in the bar, if you need a few minutes, said gail andrews.
but i would like to talk to you, and im leaving the city tonight.
she seemed to be slightly anxious about something rather than aggrieved or
irate.

16

chapter 2.

ok, said tricia. give me ten minutes.
she went up to her room. apart from anything else, she had so little faith in
the ability of the guy on the message desk at reception to deal with anything
as complicated as a message that she wanted to be doubly certain that there
wasnt a note under the door. it wouldnt be the first time that messages at
the desk and messages under the door had been completely at odds with each
other.
there wasnt one.
the message light on the phone was flashing though.
she hit the message button and got the hotel operator.
you have a message from gary andress, said the operator.
yes? said tricia. an unfamiliar name. what does it say.
not hippy, said the operator.
not what? said tricia.
hippy. what it says. guy says hes not a hippy. i guess he wanted you to
know that. you want the number?
as she started to dictate the number tricia suddenly realised that this was
just a garbled version of the message she had already had.
ok, ok, she said. are there any other messages for me?
room number?
tricia couldnt work out why the operator should suddenly ask for her number
this late in the conversation, but gave it to her anyway.
name?
mcmillan, tricia mcmillan. tricia spelt it, patiently.
not mr macmanus?
no.
no more messages for you. click.
tricia sighed and dialled again. this time she gave her name and room num-
ber all over again, up front. the operator showed not the slightest glimmer of
recognition that they had been speak- ing less than ten seconds ago.
im going to be in the bar, tricia explained. in the bar. if a phone call
comes through for me, please would you put it through to me in the bar?
name?
they went through it all a couple more times till tricia was certain that ev-
erything that possibly could be clear was as clear as it possibly could be.
she showered, put on fresh clothes and retouched her makeup with the speed
of a professional, and, looking at her bed with a sigh, left the room again.
she had half a mind just to sneak off and hide.
no. not really.
she had a look at herself in the mirror in the elevator lobby while she was

17

waiting. she looked cool and in charge, and if she could fool herself she could
fool anybody.
she was just going to have to tough it out with gail andrews. ok, she had
given her a hard time. sorry but thats the game were all in - that sort of
thing. ms andrews had agreed to do the interview because she had a new
book out and tv exposure was free publicity. but theres no such thing as a
free launch. no, she edited that line out again.
what had happened was this:
last week astronomers had announced that they had at last discovered a tenth
planet, out beyond the orbit of pluto. they had been searching for it for years,
guided by certain orbital anomalies in the outer planets, and now theyd found
it and they were all terribly pleased, and everyone was terribly happy for them
and so on. the planet was named persephone, but rapidly nicknamed rupert
after some astronomers parrot - there was some tediously heart-warming story
attached to this - and that was all very wonderful and lovely.
tricia had followed the story with, for various reasons, con- siderable interest.
then, while she had been casting around for a good excuse to go to new york
at her tv companys expense she had happened to notice a press release about
gail andrews, and her new book, you and your planets.
gail andrews was not exactly a household name, but the moment you men-
tioned president hudson, cream whips and the amputation of damascus (the
world had moved on from surgi- cal strikes. the official term had in fact been
damascectomy, meaning the taking out of damascus), everyone remem-
bered who you meant.
tricia saw an angle here which she quickly sold to her producer.
surely the notion that great lumps of rock whirling in space knew something
about your day that you didnt must take a bit of a knock from the fact that
there was suddenly a new lump of rock out there that nobody had known
about before.
that must throw a few calculations out, mustnt it?
what about all those star charts and planetary motions and so? we all knew
(apparently) what happened when neptune was in virgo, and so on, but what
about when rupert was rising? wouldnt the whole of astrology have to be
rethought? wouldnt now perhaps be a good time to own up that it was all just
a load of hogwash and instead take up pig-farming, the principles of which were
founded on some kind of rational basis? if wed known about rupert three
years ago, might president hudson have been eating the boysenberry flavour
on thursday rather than friday? might damascus still be standing? that
sort of thing.
gail andrews had taken it all reasonably well. she was just starting to recover

18

chapter 2.

from the initial onslaught, when she made the rather serious mistake of trying
to shake tricia off by talking smoothly about diurnal arcs, right ascensions
and some of the more abstruse areas of three-dimensional trigonometry.
to her shock she discovered that everything she delivered to tricia came right
back at her with more spin on it than she could cope with. nobody had warned
gail that being a tv bimbo was, for tricia, her second stab at a role in life.
behind her chanel lip gloss, her coupe sauvage and her crystal blue contact
lenses lay a brain that had acquired for itself, in an earlier, abandoned phase
of her life, a first class degree in mathematics and a doctorate in astrophysics.

as she was getting into the elevator tricia, slightly preoccupied, realised
she had left her bag in her room and wondered whether to duck back out and
get it. no. it was probably safer where it was and there wasnt anything she
particularly needed in it. she let the door close behind her.
besides, she told herself, taking a deep breath, if life had taught her anything
it was this:
never go back for your bag.
as the elevator went down she stared up at the ceiling in a rather intent way.
anyone who didnt know tricia mcmillan better would have said that that was
exactly the way people sometimes stared upwards when they were trying to
hold back tears. she must have been staring at the tiny security video camera
mounted up in the corner.

she marched rather briskly out of the elevator a minute later, and went up

to the reception desk again.
now, im going to write this out, she said, because i dont want anything
to go wrong.
she wrote her name in large letters on a piece of paper, then her room number,
then in the bar and gave it to the receptionist, who looked at it.
thats in case theres a message for me. ok?
the receptionist continued to look at it.
you want me to see if shes in her room? he said.

two minutes later, tricia swivelled into the bar seat next to gail andrews,

who was sitting in front of a glass of white wine.
you struck me as the sort of person who preferred to sit up at the bar rather
than demurely at a table, she said.
this was true, and caught tricia a little by surprise.
vodka? said gail.
yes, said tricia, suspiciously. she just stopped herself asking, how did you

19

know? but gail answered anyway.
i asked the barman, she said, with a kindly smile.
the barman had her vodka ready for her and slid it charmingly across the
glossy mahogany.
thank you, said tricia, stirring it sharply.
she didnt know quite what to make out of all this sudden niceness and was
determined not to be wrong-footed by it. people in new york were not nice
to each other without reason.
ms andrews, she said, firmly, im sorry that youre not happy. i know you
probably feel i was a bit rough with you this morning, but astrology is, after
all, just popular entertainment, which is fine. its part of showbiz and its a
part that you have done well out of and good luck to you. its fun. its not
a science though, and it shouldnt be mistaken for one. i think thats some-
thing we both managed to demonstrate very successfully together this morn-
ing, while at the same time generating some popular entertainment, which is
what we both do for a living. im sorry if you have a problem with that.
im perfectly happy, said gail andrews.
oh, said tricia, not quite certain what to make of this. it said in your
message that you were not happy.
no, said gail andrews. i said in my message that i thought you were not
happy, and i was just wondering why.
tricia felt as if she had been kicked in the back of the head. she blinked.
what? she said quietly.
to do with the stars. you seemed very angry and unhappy about something
to do with stars and planets when we were having our discussion, and its been
bothering me, which is why i came to see if you were all right.
tricia stared at her. ms andrews -  she started, and then realised that the
way she had said it sounded exactly angry and unhappy and rather under-
mined the protest she had been trying to make.
please call me gail, if thats ok.
tricia just looked bewildered.
i know that astrology isnt a science, said gail. of course it isnt. its just
an arbitrary set of rules like chess or tennis or, whats that strange thing you
british play?
er, cricket? self-loathing?
parliamentary democracy. the rules just kind of got there. they dont make
any kind of sense except in terms of them- selves. but when you start to
exercise those rules, all sorts of processes start to happen and you start to
find out all sorts of stuff about people. in astrology the rules happen to be
about stars and planets, but they could be about ducks and drakes for all the

20

chapter 2.

difference it would make. its just a way of thinking about a problem which
lets the shape of that problem begin to emerge. the more rules, the tinier the
rules, the more arbitrary they are, the better. its like throwing a handful of
fine graphite dust on a piece of paper to see where the hidden indentations
are. it lets you see the words that were written on the piece of paper above
it thats now been taken away and hidden. the graphites not important. its
just the means of revealing their indentations. so you see, astrologys nothing
to do with astronomy. its just to do with people thinking about people.
so when you got so, i dont know, so emotionally focused on stars and planets
this morning, i began to think, shes not angry about astrology, she really is
angry and unhappy about actual stars and planets. people usually only get
that unhappy and angry when theyve lost something. thats all i could think
and i couldnt make any more sense of it than that. so i came to see if you
were ok.
tricia was stunned.
one part of her brain had already got started on all sorts of stuff.
it was
busy constructing all sorts of rebuttals to do with how ridiculous newspaper
horoscopes were and the sort of statistical tricks they played on people. but
gradually it petered out, because it realised that the rest of her brain wasnt
listening. she had been completely stunned.
she had just been told, by a total stranger, something shed kept completely
secret for seventeen years.
she turned to look at gail.
i...
she stopped.
a tiny security camera up behind the bar had turned to follow her movement.
this completely flummoxed her. most people would not have noticed it. it
was not designed to be noticed. it was not designed to suggest that nowadays
even an expensive and elegant hotel in new york couldnt be sure that its
clientele wasnt suddenly going to pull a gun or not wear a tie. but carefully
hidden though it was behind the vodka, it couldnt deceive the finely honed
instinct of a tv anchor person, which was to know exactly when a camera was
turning to look at her.
is something wrong? asked gail.
no, i... i have to say that youve rather astonished me, said tricia. she de-
cided to ignore the security camera. it was just her imagination playing tricks
with her because she had television so much on her mind today. it wasnt the
first time it had happened. a traffic monitoring camera, she was convinced,
had swung round to follow her as she walked past it, and a secu- rity camera in
bloomingdales had seemed to make a particular point of watching her trying

21

on hats. she was obviously going dotty. she had even imagined that a bird in
central park had been peering at her rather intently.
she decided to put it out of her mind and took a sip of her vodka. someone
was walking round the bar asking people if they were mr macmanus.
ok, she said, suddenly blurting it out. i dont know how you worked it
out, but...
i didnt work it out, as you put it. i just listened to what you were saying.
what i lost, i think, was a whole other life.
everybody does that. every moment of every day. every single decision we
make, every breath we draw, opens some doors and closes many others. most
of them we dont notice. some we do. sounds like you noticed one.
oh yes, i noticed, said tricia. all right. here it is. its very simple. many
years ago i met a guy at a party. he said he was from another planet and did
i want to go along with him. i said, yes, ok. it was that kind of party. i said
to him to wait while i went to get my bag and then id be happy to go off to
another planet with him. he said i wouldnt need my bag. i said he obviously
came from a very backward planet or hed know that a woman always needed
to take her bag with her. he got a bit impatient, but i wasnt gong to be a
complete pushover just because he said he was from another planet.
i went upstairs. took me a while to find my bag, and then there was someone
else in the bathroom. came down and he was gone.
tricia paused.
and...? said gail.
the garden door was open. i went outside. there were lights. some kind of
gleaming thing. i was just in time to see it rise up into the sky, shoot silently
up through the clouds and disappear. that was it. end of story. end of one
life, beginning of another. but hardly a moment of this life goes by that i
dont wonder about some other me. a me that didnt go back for her bag. i
feel like shes out there somewhere and im walking in her shadow.
a member of the hotel staff was now going round the bar asking people if they
were mr miller. nobody was.
you really think this... person was from another planet? asked gail.
oh, certainly. there was the spacecraft. oh, and also he had two heads.
two? didnt anybody else notice?
it was a fancy dress party.
i see...
and he had a bird cage over it, of course. with a cloth over the cage. pre-
tended he had a parrot. he tapped on the cage and it did a lot of stupid
pretty polly stuff and squawking and so on. then he pulled the cloth back
for a moment and roared with laughter. there was another head in there,

22

chapter 2.

laughing along with him. it was a worrying moment i can tell you.
i think you probably did the right thing, dear, dont you? said gail.
no, said tricia. no i dont. and i couldnt carry on doing what i was
doing either. i was an astrophysicist, you see. you cant be an astrophysi-
cist properly if youve actually met someone from another planet whos got a
second head that pretends to be a parrot. you just cant do it. i couldnt at
least.
i can see it would be hard. and thats probably why you tend to be a little
hard on other people who talk what sounds like complete nonsense.
yes, said tricia. i expect youre right. im sorry.
thats ok.
youre the first person ive ever told this, by the way.
i wondered. you married?
er, no. so hard to tell these days isnt it? but youre right to ask because
that was probably the reason. i came very close a few times, mostly because
i wanted to have a kid. but every guy ended up asking why i was constantly
looking over his shoulder. what do you tell someone? at one point i even
thought i might just go to a sperm bank and take pot luck. have somebodys
child at random.
you cant seriously do that, can you?
tricia laughed. probably not.
i never quite went and found out for real.
never quite did it. story of my life. never quite did the real thing. thats
why im in television i guess. nothing is real.
excuse me lady, your name tricia mcmillan?
tricia looked round in surprise. there was a man standing there in a chauffeurs
hat.
yes, she said, instantly pulling herself back together again.
lady, i been looking for you for about an hour. hotel said they didnt have
anybody of that name, but i checked back with mr martins office and they
said that this was definitely where you staying. so i ask again, they still say
they never heard of you, so i get them to page you anyway and they cant find
you. in the end i get the office to fax a picture of you through to the car
and have a look myself.
he looked at his watch.
may be a bit late now, but do you want to go anyway?
tricia was stunned.
mr martin? you mean andy martin at nbs?
thats correct, lady. screen test for us/am.
tricia shot up out of her seat. she couldnt even bear to think of all the mes-
sages shed heard for mr macmanus and mr miller.

23

only we have to hurry, said the chauffeur. as i heard it mr martin thinks
it might be worth trying a british accent. his boss at the network is dead
against the idea. thats mr zwingler, and i happen to know hes flying out
to the coast this evening because im the one has to pick him up and take him
to the airport.
ok, said tricia, im ready. lets go.
ok, lady. its the big limo out the front.
tricia turned back to gail. im sorry, she said.
go! go! said gail. and good luck. ive enjoyed meeting you.
tricia made to reach for her bag for some cash.
damn, she said. shed left it upstairs.
drinks are on me, insisted gail. really. its been very interesting.
tricia sighed.
look, im really sorry about this morning and...
dont say another word. im fine. its only astrology. its harmless. its not
the end of the world.
thanks. on an impulse tricia gave her a hug.
you got everything? said the chauffeur. you dont want to pick up your
bag or anything?
if theres one thing that lifes taught me, said tricia, its never go back for
your bag.

just a little over an hour later, tricia sat on one of the pair of beds in her
hotel room. for a few minutes she didnt move. she just stared at her bag,
which was sitting innocently on top of the other bed.
in her hand was a note from gail andrews, saying, dont be too disappointed.
do ring if you want to talk about it. if i were you id stay in at home tomorrow
night. get some rest. but dont mind me, and dont worry. its only astrology.
its not the end of the world. gail.
the chauffeur had been dead right.
in fact the chauffeur seemed to know
more about what was going on inside nbs than any other single person she
had encountered in the organisation. martin had been keen, zwingler had not.
she had had her one shot at proving martin right and she had blown it.
oh well. oh well, oh well, oh well.
time to go home. time to phone the airline and see if she could still get the
red-eye back to heathrow. tonight. she reached for the big phone directory.
oh. first things first.
she put down the directory again, picked up her handbag, and took it through
to the bathroom. she put it down and took out the small plastic case which
held her contact lenses, without which she had been unable properly to read

24

chapter 2.

either the script or the autocue.
as she dabbed each tiny plastic cup into her eyes she reflected that if there
was one thing life had taught her it was that there are times when you do not
go back for your bag and other times when you do. it had yet to teach her to
distinguish between the two types of occasion.



the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy has, in what we laughingly call the
past, had a great deal to say on the subject of parallel universes. very little of
this is, however, at all comprehensible to anyone below the level of advanced
god, and since it is now well-established that all known gods came into ex-
istence a good three millionths of a second after the universe began rather
than, as they usually claimed, the previous week, they already have a great
deal of explaining to do as it is, and are therefore not available for comment
on matters of deep physics at this time.
one encouraging thing the guide does have to say on the subject of parallel
universes is that you dont stand the remotest chance of understanding it. you
can therefore say what? and eh? and even go cross-eyed and start to
blither if you like without any fear of making a fool of yourself.
the first thing to realise about parallel universes, the guide says, is that they
are not parallel.
it is also important to realise that they are not, strictly speaking, universes
either, but it is easiest if you try and realise that a little later, after youve
realised that everything youve realised up to that moment is not true.
the reason they are not universes is that any given universe is not actually a
thing as such, but is just a way of looking at what is technically known as the
wsogmm, or whole sort of general mish mash. the whole sort of general
mish mash doesnt actually exist either, but is just the sum total of all the
different ways there would be of looking at it if it did.
the reason they are not parallel is the same reason that the sea is not parallel.
it doesnt mean anything. you can slice the whole sort of general mish mash
any way you like and you will generally come up with something that someone
will call home.
please feel free to blither now.26

chapter 3.

the earth with which we are here concerned, because of its particular ori-
entation in the whole sort of general mish mash, was hit by a neutrino that
other earths were not.
a neutrino is not a big thing to be hit by.
in fact its hard to think of anything much smaller by which one could rea-
sonably hope to be hit. and its not as if being hit by neutrinos was in itself
a particularly unusual event for something the size of the earth. far from it.
it would be an unusual nanosecond in which the earth was not hit by several
billion passing neutrinos.
it all depends on what you mean by hit, of course, seeing as matter consists
almost entirely of nothing at all. the chances of a neutrino actually hitting
something as it travels through all this howling emptiness are roughly compa-
rable to that of dropping a ball bearing at random from a cruising 747 and
hitting, say, an egg sandwich.
anyway, this neutrino hit something. nothing terribly impor- tant in the
scale of things, you might say. but the problem with saying something like
that is that you would be talking cross- eyed badger spit. once something ac-
tually happens somewhere in something as wildly complicated as the universe,
kevin knows where it will all end up - where kevin is any random entity
that doesnt know nothin about nothin.
this neutrino struck an atom.
the atom was part of a molecule. the molecule was part of a nucleic acid.
the nucleic acid was part of a gene. the gene was part of a genetic recipe for
growing... and so on. the upshot was that a plant ended up growing an extra
leaf. in essex. or what would, after a lot of palaver and local difficulties of a
geological nature, become essex.
the plant was a clover. it threw its weight, or rather its seed, around extremely
effectively and rapidly became the worlds dominant type of clover. the pre-
cise causal connection between this tiny biological happenstance, and a few
other minor vari- ations that exist in that slice of the whole sort of general
mish mash - such as tricia mcmillan failing to leave with zaphod beeblebrox,
abnormally low sales of pecan-flavoured ice-cream and the fact that the earth
on which all this occurred did not get demolished by the vogons to make way
for a new hyperspace bypass - is currently sitting at number 4,763,984,132 on
the research project priority list at what was once the history department of
the university of maximegalon, and no one cur- rently at the prayer meeting
by the poolside appears to feel any sense of urgency about the problem.



tricia began to feel that the world was conspiring against her. she knew that
this was a perfectly normal way to feel after an overnight flight going east,
when you suddenly have a whole other mysteriously threatening day to deal
with for which you are not the least bit prepared. but still.
there were marks on her lawn.
she didnt really care about marks on her lawn very much. marks on her lawn
could go and take a running jump as far as she was concerned. it was satur-
day morning. she had just got home from new york feeling tired, crabby and
paranoid, and all she wanted to do was go to bed with the radio on quietly and
gradually fall asleep to the sound of ned sherrin being terribly clever about
something.
but eric bartlett was not going to let her get away with not making a thor-
ough inspection of the marks. eric was the old gardener who came in from the
village on saturday mornings to poke around at her garden with a stick. he
didnt believe in people coming in from new york first thing in the morning.
didnt hold with it. went against nature. he believed in virtually everything
else, though.
probably them space aliens, he said, bending over and prod- ding at the
edges of the small indentations with his stick. hear a lot about space aliens
these days. i expect its them.
do you? said tricia, looking furtively at her watch. ten minutes, she reck-
oned. ten minutes shed be able to stay standing up. then she would simply
keel over, whether she was in her bedroom or still out here in the garden. that
was if she just had to stand. if she also had to nod intelligently and say do
you? from time to time, it might cut it down to five.
oh yes, said eric. they come down here, land on your lawn, and then buzz
off again, sometimes with your cat. mrs williams at the post office, her cat
- you know the ginger. one? - it got abducted by space aliens. course, they28

chapter 4.

brought it back the next day but it were in a very odd mood. kept prowling
around all morning, and then falling asleep in the afternoon. used to be the
other way round, is the point. sleep in the morning, prowl in the afternoon.
jet lag, you see, from being in an interplanetary craft.
i see, said tricia.
they dyed it tabby, too, she says. these marks are exactly the sort of marks
that their landing pods would probably make.
you dont think its the lawn mower? asked tricia.
if the marks were more round, id say, but these are just off-round, you see.
altogether more alien in shape.
its just that you mentioned the lawn mower was playing up and needed fixing
or it might start gouging holes in the lawn.
i did say that, miss tricia, and i stand by what i said. im not saying its
not the lawn mower for definite, im just saying what seems to me more likely
given the shapes of the holes. they come in over these trees, you see, in their
landing pods...
eric..., said tricia, patiently.
tell you what, though, miss tricia, said eric, i will take a look at the
mower, like i meant to last week, and leave you to get on with whatever you
re wanting to.
thank you, eric, said tricia. im going to bed now, in fact. help yourself
to anything you want in the kitchen.
thank you, miss tricia, and good luck to you, said eric. he bent over and
picked something from the lawn.
there, he said. three-leaf clover. good luck you see.
he peered at it closely to check that it was a real three-leaf clover and not
just a regular four-leaf one that one of the leaves had fallen off. if i were
you, though, id watch for signs of alien activity in the area. he scanned the
horizon keenly. particularly from over there in the henley direction.
thank you, eric, said tricia again. i will.
she went to bed and dreamt fitfully of parrots and other birds. in the after-
noon she got up and prowled around restlessly, not certain what to do with
the rest of the day, or indeed the rest of her life. she spent at least an hour
dithering, trying to make up her mind whether to head up into town and go
to stavros for the evening. this was the currently fashionable spot for high-
flying media people, and seeing a few friends there might help her ease herself
back into the swing of things. she decided at last she would go. it was good.
it was fun there. she was very fond of stavro himself, who was a greek with
a german father - a fairly odd combination. tricia had been to the alpha a
couple of nights earlier, which was stavros original club in new york, now

29

run by his brother karl, who thought of himself as a german with a greek
mother. stavro would be very happy to be told that karl was making a bit of
a pigs ear of running the new york club, so tricia would go and make him
happy. there was little love lost between stavro and karl mueller.
ok. thats what she would do.
she then spent another hour dithering about what to wear. at last she settled
on a smart little black dress shed got in new york. she phoned a friend to see
who was likely to be at the club that evening, and was told that it was closed
this evening for a private wedding party.
she thought that trying to live life according to any plan you actually work
out is like trying to buy ingredients for a recipe from the supermarket. you
get one of those trolleys which simply will not go in the direction you push
it and end up just having to buy completely different stuff. what do you do
with it? what do you do with the recipe? she didnt know.
anyway, that night an alien spacecraft landed on her lawn.

30

chapter 4.



she watched it coming in from over the henley direction with mild curiosity
at first, wondering what those lights were. living, as she did, not a million
miles from heathrow, she was used to seeing lights in the sky. not usually so
late in the evening, or so low, though, which was why she was mildly curious.
when whatever it was began to come closer and closer her curiosity began to
turn to bemusement.
hmmm, she thought, which was about as far as she could get with thinking.
she was still feeling dopey and jet-lagged and the messages that one part of
her brain was busy sending to another were not necessarily arriving on time or
the right way up. she left the kitchen where shed been fixing herself a coffee
and went to open the back door which led out to the garden. she took a deep
breath of cool evening air, stepped outside and looked up.
there was something roughly the size of a large camper van parked about a
hundred feet above her lawn.
it was really there. hanging there. almost silent.
something moved deep inside her.
her arms dropped slowly down to her side. she didnt notice the scalding
coffee slopping over her foot. she was hardly breathing as slowly, inch by
inch, foot by foot, the craft came downwards. its lights were playing softly
over the ground as if probing and feeling it. they played over her.
it seemed beyond all hope that she should be given her chance again. had he
found her? had he come back? the craft dropped down and down until at
last it had settled quietly on her lawn. it didnt look exactly like the one she
had seen departing all those years ago, she thought, but flashing lights in the
night sky are hard to resolve into clear shapes.
silence.
then a click and a hum.
then another click and another hum. click hum, click hum.32

chapter 5.

a doorway slid open, spilling light towards her across the lawn.
she waited, tingling.
a figure stood silhouetted in the light, then another, and another.
wide eyes blinked slowly at her. hands were slowly raised in greeting.
mcmillan? a voice said at last, a strange, thin voice that managed the syl-
lables with difficulty. tricia mcmillan. ms tricia mcmillan?
yes, said tricia, almost soundlessly.
we have been monitoring you.
m... monitoring? me?
yes.
they looked at her for a while, their large eyes moving up and down her very
slowly.
you look smaller in real life, one said at last.
what? said tricia.
yes.
i...
i dont understand, said tricia. she hadnt expected any of this, of
course, but even for something she hadnt expected to begin with it wasnt
going the way she expected. at last she said,
are you... are you from... zaphod?
this question seemed to cause a little consternation among the three figures.
they conferred with each other in some skittering language of their own and
then turned back to her.
we dont think so. not as far as we know, said one.
where is zaphod? said another, looking up into the night sky.
i... i dont know, said tricia, helplessly.
is it far from here? which direction? we dont know.
tricia realised with a sinking heart that they had no idea who she was talking
about. or even what she was talking about. and she had no idea what they
were talking about. she put her hopes tightly away again and snapped her
brain back into gear. there was no point in being disappointed. she had to
wake up to the fact that she had here the journalistic scoop of the cen- tury.
what should she do? go back into the house for a video camera? wouldnt
they just be gone when she got back? she was thoroughly confused as to
strategy. keepem talking, she thought. figure it out later.
youve been monitoring... me?
all of you. everything on your planet. tv. radio. tele- communications.
computers. video circuitry. warehouses.
what?
car parks. everything. we monitor everything.
tricia stared at them.

33

that must be very boring, isnt it? she blurted out.
yes.
so why...
except...
yes? except what?
game shows. we quite like game shows.
there was a terribly long silence as tricia looked at the aliens and the aliens
looked at her.
theres something i would just like to get from indoors, said tricia very
deliberately. tell you what. would you, or one of you, like to come inside
with me and have a look?
very much, they all said, enthusiastically.

all three of them stood, slightly awkwardly in her sitting room, as she
hurried around picking up a video camera, a 35mm camera, a tape recorder,
every recording medium she could grab hold of. they were all thin and, under
domestic lighting conditions, a sort of dim purplish green.
i really wont be a second, guys, tricia said, as she rummaged through some
drawers for spare tapes and films.
the aliens were looking at the shelves that held her cds and her old records.
one of them nudged one of the others very slightly.
look, he said. elvis.
tricia stopped, and stared at them all over again.
you like elvis? she said.
yes, they said.
elvis presley?
yes.
she shook her head in bewilderment as she tried to stuff a new tape into her
video camera.
some of your people, said one of her visitors, hesitantly, think that elvis
has been kidnapped by space aliens.
what? said tricia. has he?
it is possible.
are you telling me that you have kidnapped elvis? gasped tricia. she was
trying to keep cool enough not to foul up her equipment, but this was all al-
most too much for her.
no. not us, said her guests. aliens. it is a very interesting possibility. we
talk of it often.
i must get this down, tricia muttered to herself. she checked her video was
properly loaded and working now. she pointed the camera at them. she didnt

34

chapter 5.

put it up to her eye because she didnt want to freak them out. but she was
sufficiently experienced to be able to shoot accurately from the hip.
ok, she said. now tell me slowly and carefully who you are. you first,
she said to the one on the left. whats your name?
i dont know.
you dont know.
no.
i see, said tricia. and what about you other two?
we dont know.
good. ok. perhaps you can tell me where you are from?
they shook their heads.
you dont know where youre from?
they shook their heads again.
so, said tricia. what are you... er...
she was floundering but, being a professional, kept the camera steady while
she did it.
we are on a mission, said one of the aliens.
a mission? a mission to do what?
we do not know.
still she kept the camera steady.
so what are you doing here on earth, then?
we have come to fetch you.
rock steady, rock steady. could have been on a tripod. she wondered if she
should be using a tripod, in fact. she wondered that because it gave her a
moment or two to digest what they had just said. no, she thought, hand-held
gave her more flexibility. she also thought, help, what am i going to do?
why, she asked, calmly, have you come to fetch me?
because we have lost our minds.
excuse me, said tricia, im going to have to get a tripod.
they seemed happy enough to stand there doing nothing while tricia quickly
found a tripod and mounted the camera on it. her face was completely im-
mobile, but she did not have the faintest idea what was going on or what to
think about it.
ok, she said, when she was ready. why...
we liked your interview with the astrologer.
you saw it?
we see everything. we are very interested in astrology. we like it. it is very
interesting. not everything is interesting. astrology is interesting. what the
stars tell us. what the stars foretell. we could do with some information like
that.

35

but...
tricia didnt know where to start.
own up, she thought. theres no point in trying to second guess any of this
stuff.
so she said, but i dont know anything about astrology.
we do.
you do?
yes. we follow our horoscopes. we are very avid. we see all your newspapers
and your magazines and are very avid with them. but our leader says we have
a problem.
you have a leader?
yes.
whats his name?
we do not know.
what does he say his name is, for christs sake? sorry ill need to edit that.
what does he say his name is?
he does not know.
so how do you all know hes the leader?
he seized control. he said someone has to do something round here.
ah! , said tricia, seizing on a clue. where is here?
rupert.
what?
your people call it rupert. the tenth planet from your sun. we have settled
there for many years. it is highly cold and uninteresting there. but good for
monitoring.
why are you monitoring us?
it is all we know to do.
ok, said tricia. right. what is the problem that your leader says you
have?
triangulation.
i beg your pardon?
astrology is a very precise science. we know this.
well... said tricia, then left it at that.
but it is precise for you here on earth.
ye... e... s... she had a horrible feeling she was getting a vague glimmering
of something.
so when venus is rising in capricorn, for instance, that is from earth. how
does that work if we are out on rupert? what if the earth is rising in capri-
corn? it is hard for us to know. amongst the things we have forgotten, which
we think are many and profound, is trigonometry.

36

chapter 5.

let me get this straight, said tricia. you want me to come with you to...
rupert...
yes.
to recalculate your horoscopes for you to take account of the relative posi-
tions of earth and rupert?
yes.
do i get an exclusive?
yes.
im your girl, said tricia, thinking that at the very least she could sell it to
the national enquirer.

as she boarded the craft that would take her off to the furthest limits
of the solar system, the first thing that met her eyes was a bank of video
monitors across which thousands of images were sweeping. a fourth alien was
sitting watching them, but was focused on one particular screen that held a
steady image. it was a replay of the impromptu interview which tricia had
just conducted with his three colleagues. he looked up when he saw her ap-
prehensively climbing in.
good evening, ms mcmillan, he said. nice camera work.



ford prefect hit the ground running. the ground was about three inches fur-
ther from the ventilation shaft than he remembered it so he misjudged the
point at which he would hit the ground, started running too soon, stumbled
awkwardly and twisted his ankle. damn! he ran off down the corridor any-
way, hobbling slightly.
all over the building, alarms were erupting into their usual frenzy of excite-
ment. he dived for cover behind the usual storage cabinets, glanced around to
check that he was unseen, and started rapidly to fish around inside his satchel
for the usual things he needed.
his ankle, unusually, was hurting like hell.
the ground was not only three inches further from the ven- tilation shaft than
he remembered, it was also on a different planet than he remembered, but it
was the three inches that had caught him by surprise. the offices of the hitch
hikers guide to the galaxy were quite often shifted at very short notice to
another planet, for reasons of local climate, local hostility, power bills or tax,
but they were always reconstructed exactly the same way, almost to the very
molecule. for many of the companys employees, the layout of their offices
represented the only constant they knew in a severely distorted personal uni-
verse.
something, though, was odd.
this was not in itself surprising, thought ford as he pulled out his lightweight
throwing towel. virtually everything in his life was, to a greater or lesser ex-
tent, odd. it was just that this was odd in a slightly different way than he was
used to things being odd, which was, well, strange. he couldnt quite get it
into focus immediately.
he got out his no.3 gauge prising tool. the alarms were going in the same
old way that he knew well. there was a kind of music to them that he could
almost hum along to. that was all very familiar. the world outside had been38

chapter 6.

a new one on ford. he had not been to saquo-pilia hensha before, and he
had liked it. it had a kind of carnival atmosphere to it.
he took from his satchel a toy bow and arrow which he had bought in a street
market.
he had discovered that the reason for the carnival atmosphere on saquo-pilia
hensha was that the local people were celebrating the annual feast of the as-
sumption of st antwelm. st antwelm had been, during his lifetime, a great
and popular king who had made a great and popular assumption. what king
antwelm had assumed was that what everybody wanted, all other things be-
ing equal, was to be happy and enjoy themselves and have the best possible
time together. on his death he had willed his entire per- sonal fortune to
financing an annual festival to remind everyone of this, with lots of good food
and dancing and very silly games like hunt the wocket. his assumption had
been such a brilliantly good one that he was made into a saint for it. not only
that, but all the people who had previously been made saints for doing things
like being stoned to death in a thoroughly miserable way or living upside down
in barrels of dung were instantly demoted and were now thought to be rather
embarrassing.
the familiar h-shaped building of the hitch hikers guide offices rose above
the outskirts of the city, and ford prefect had broken into it in the famil-
iar way. he always entered via the ventilation system rather than the main
lobby because the main lobby was patrolled by robots whose job it was to quiz
incoming employees about their expense accounts. ford prefects expense ac-
counts were notoriously complex and difficult affairs and he had found, on the
whole, that the lobby robots were ill-equipped to understand the arguments
he wished to put forward in relation to them. he preferred, therefore, to make
his entrance by another route.
this meant setting off nearly every alarm in the building, but not the one in
the accounts department, which was the way that ford preferred it.
he hunkered down behind the storage cabinet, he licked the rubber suction
cup of the toy arrow, and then fitted it to the string of the bow.
within about thirty seconds a security robot the size of a small melon came
flying down the corridor at about waist height, scanning left and right for
anything unusual as it did so.
with impeccable timing ford shot the toy arrow across its path. the arrow
flew across the corridor and stuck, wobbling, on the opposite wall. as it flew,
the robots sensors locked on to it instantly and the robot twisted through
ninety degrees to follow it, see what the hell it was and where it was going.
this bought ford one precious second, during which the robot was looking in
the opposite direction from him. he hurled the towel over the flying robot and

39

caught it.
because of the various sensory protuberances with which the robot was fes-
tooned, it couldnt manoeuvre inside the towel, and it just twitched back and
forth without being able to turn and face its captor.
ford hauled it quickly towards him and pinned it down to the ground. it was
beginning to whine pitifully. with one swift and practised movement, ford
reached under the towel with his no.3 gauge prising tool and flipped off the
small plastic panel on top of the robot which gave access to its logic circuits.
now logic is a wonderful thing but it has, as the processes of evolution discov-
ered, certain drawbacks.
anything that thinks logically can be fooled by something else which thinks
at least as logically as it does. the easiest way to fool a completely logical
robot is to feed it the same stimulus sequence over and over again so it gets
locked in a loop. this was best demonstrated by the famous herring sand-
wich experiments conducted millennia ago at mispwoso (the maximegalon
institute of slowly and painfully working out the surprisingly obvious).
a robot was programmed to believe that it liked herring sandwiches. this
was actually the most difficult part of the whole experiment. once the robot
had been programmed to believe that it liked herring sandwiches, a herring
sandwich was placed in front of it. whereupon the robot thought to itself,
ah! a herring sandwich! i like herring sandwiches.
it would then bend over and scoop up the herring sandwich in its herring sand-
wich scoop, and then straighten up again. unfortunately for the robot, it was
fashioned in such a way that the action of straightening up caused the herring
sandwich to slip straight back off its herring sandwich scoop and fall on to
the floor in front of the robot. whereupon the robot thought to itself, ah!
a herring sandwich..., etc., and repeated the same action over and over and
over again. the only thing that prevented the her- ring sandwich from getting
bored with the whole damn business and crawling off in search of other ways
of passing the time was that the herring sandwich, being just a bit of dead
fish between a couple of slices of bread, was marginally less alert to what was
going on than was the robot.
the scientists at the institute thus discovered the driving force behind all
change, development and innovation in life, which was this: herring sand-
wiches. they published a paper to this effect, which was widely criticised as
being extremely stupid. they checked their figures and realised that what
they had actually discovered was boredom, or rather, the practical function
of boredom.
in a fever of excitement they then went on to discover other
emotions, like irritability, depression, reluctance, ickiness and so on.
the next big breakthrough came when they stopped using herring sandwiches,

40

chapter 6.

whereupon a whole welter of new emotions became suddenly available to them
for study, such as relief, joy, friskiness, appetite, satisfaction, and
most important of all, the desire for happiness.
this was the biggest breakthrough of all.
vast wodges of complex computer code governing robot behav- iour in all pos-
sible contingencies could be replaced very simply. all that robots needed was
the capacity to be either bored or happy, and a few conditions that needed to
be satisfied in order to bring those states about. they would then work the
rest out for themselves.
the robot which ford had got trapped under his towel was not, at the moment
a happy robot. it was happy when it could move about. it was happy when
it could see other things. it was particularly happy when it could see other
things moving about, particularly if the other things were moving about do-
ing things they shouldnt do because it could then, with considerable delight,
report them.
ford would soon fix that.
he squatted over the robot and held it between his knees. the towel was still
covering all of its sensory mechanisms, but ford had now got its logic circuits
exposed. the robot was whirring grungily and pettishly, but it could only
fidget, it couldnt actually move. using the prising tool, ford eased a small
chip out from its socket. as soon as it came out, the robot went quiet and just
sat there in a coma.
the chip ford had taken out was the one which contained the instructions for
all the conditions that had to be fulfilled in order for the robot to feel happy.
the robot would be happy when a tiny electrical charge from a point just to
the left of the chip reached another point just to the right of the chip. the
chip determined whether the charge got there or not.
ford pulled out a small length of wire that had been threaded into the towel.
he dug one end of it into the top left hole of the chip socket and the other into
the bottom right hole.
that was all it took. now the robot would be happy whatever happened.
ford quickly stood up and whisked the towel away. the robot rose ecstatically
into the air, pursuing a kind of wriggly path.
it turned and saw ford.
mr prefect, sir! im so happy to see you!
good to see you, little fella, said ford.
the robot rapidly reported back to its central control that everything was
now for the best in this best of all possible worlds, the alarms rapidly quelled
themselves, and life returned to normal.
at least, almost to normal.

41

there was something odd about the place.
the little robot was gurgling with electric delight. ford hurried on down the
corridor, letting the thing bob along in his wake telling him how delicious ev-
erything was, and how happy it was to be able to tell him that.
ford, however , was not happy.
he passed faces of people he didnt know. they didnt look like his sort of
people. they were too well groomed. their eyes were too dead. every time
he thought he saw someone he recognised in the distance, and hurried along
to say hello, it would turn out to be someone else, with an altogether neater
hairstyle and a much more thrusting, purposeful look than, well, than anybody
ford knew.
a staircase had been moved a few inches to the left. a ceiling had been lowered
slightly. a lobby had been remodelled. all these things were not worrying in
themselves, though they were a little disorienting. the thing that was worrying
was the decor. it used to be brash and glitzy. expensive - because the guide
sold so well through the civilised and post-civilised galaxy - but expensive and
fun. wild games machines lined the corridors. insanely painted grand pianos
hung from ceilings, vicious sea creatures from the planet viv reared up out of
pools in tree-filled atria, robot butlers in stupid shirts roamed the corridors
seeking whose hands they might press frothing drinks into. people used to
have pet vastdragons on leads and pterospondes on perches in their offices.
people knew how to have a good time, and if they didnt there were courses
they could sign up for which would put that right.
there was none of that now.
somebody had been through the place doing some iniquitous kind of taste job
on it.
ford turned sharply into a small alcove, cupped his hand and yanked the flying
robot in with him. he squatted down and peered at the burbling cybernaut.
whats been happening here? he demanded.
oh just the nicest things, sir, just the nicest possible things. can i sit on
your lap, please?
no, said ford, brushing the thing away. it was overjoyed to be spurned in
this way and started to bob and burble and swoon. ford grabbed it again and
stuck it firmly in the air a foot in front of his face. it tried to stay where it
was put but couldnt help quivering slightly.
somethings changed, hasnt it? ford hissed.
oh yes, squealed the little robot, in the most fabulous and wonderful way.
i feel so good about it.
well what was it like before, then?
scrumptious.

42

chapter 6.

but you like the way its changed? demanded ford.
i like everything, moaned the robot. especially when you shout at me like
that. do it again, please.
just tell me whats happened!
oh thank you, thank you!
ford sighed.
ok, ok, panted the robot. the guide has been taken over. theres a new
management. its all so gorgeous i could just melt. the old management was
also fabulous of course, though im not sure if i thought so at the time.
that was before you had a bit of wire stuck in your head.
how true. how wonderfully true. how wonderfully, bub- blingly, frothingly,
burstingly true. what a truly ecstasy-induc- ingly correct observation.
whats happened? insisted ford. who is this new man- agement? when
did they take over? i... oh, never mind, he added, as the little robot started
to gibbet with uncontrollable joy and rub itself against his knee. ill go and
find out for myself.

ford hurled himself at the door of the editor-in-chiefs office, tucked him-
self into a tight ball as the frame splintered and gave way, rolled rapidly across
the floor to where the drinks trolley laden with some of the galaxys most
potent and expen- sive beverages habitually stood, seized hold of the trolley
and, using it to give himself cover, trundled it and himself across the main ex-
posed part of the office floor to where the valuable and extremely rude statue
of leda and the octopus stood, and took shelter behind it. meanwhile the
little security robot, entering at chest height, was suicidally delighted to draw
gunfire away from ford.
that, at least, was the plan, and a necessary one. the current editor-in-chief,
stagyar-zil-doggo, was a dangerously unbalanced man who took a homici-
dal view of contributing staff turning up in his office without pages of fresh,
proofed copy, and had a battery of laser guided guns linked to special scanning
devices in the door frame to deter anybody who was merely bringing extremely
good reasons why they hadnt written any. thus was a high level of output
maintained.
unfortunately the drinks trolley wasnt there.
ford hurled himself desperately sideways and somersaulted towards the statue
of leda and the octopus, which also wasnt there. he rolled and hurtled
around the room in a kind of random panic, tripped, span, hit the window,
which fortunately was built to withstand rocket attacks, rebounded, and fell
in a bruised and winded heap behind a smart grey crushed leather sofa, which
hadnt been there before.

43

after a few seconds he slowly peeked up above the top of the sofa. as well
as there being no drinks trolley and no leda and the octopus, there had also
been a startling absence of gunfire. he frowned. this was all utterly wrong.
mr prefect, i assume, said a voice.
the voice came from a smooth-faced individual behind a large ceramo-teak-
bonded desk. stagyar-zil-doggo may well have been a hell of an individual,
but no one, for a whole variety of reasons, would ever have called him smooth-
faced. this was not stagyar-zil-doggo.
i assume from the manner of your entrance that you do not have new material
for the, er, guide, at the moment, said the smooth-faced individual. he was
sitting with his elbows resting on the table and holding his fingertips together
in a manner which, inexplicably, has never been made a capital offence.
ive been busy, said ford, rather weakly. he staggered to his feet, brushing
himself down. then he thought, what the hell was he saying things weakly
for? he had to get on top of this situation. he had to find out who the hell
this person was, and he suddenly thought of a way of doing it.
who the hell are you?, he demanded.
i am your new editor-in-chief. that is, if we decide to retain your services.
my name is vann harl. he didnt put his hand out. he just added, what
have you done to that security robot?
the little robot was rolling very, very slowly round the ceiling and moaning
quietly to itself.
ive made it very happy, snapped ford. its a kind of mission i have.
wheres stagyar? more to the point, wheres his drinks trolley?
mr zil-doggo is no longer with this organisation. his drinks trolley is, i imag-
ine, helping to console him for this fact.
organisation? yelled ford. organisation? what a bloody stupid word for
a set-up like this!
precisely our sentiments. under-structured, over-resourced, under-managed,
over-inebriated. and that, said harl, was just the editor.
ill do the jokes, snarled ford.
no, said harl. you will do the restaurant column.
he tossed a piece of plastic on to the desk in front of him. ford did not move
to pick it up.
you what? said ford.
no. me harl. you prefect. you do restaurant column. me editor. me sit
here tell you you do restaurant column. you get?
restaurant column? said ford, too bewildered to be really angry yet.
siddown, prefect, said harl. he swung round in his swivel chair, got to his
feet, and stood staring out at the tiny specks enjoying the carnival twenty-

44

chapter 6.

three stories below.
time to get this business on its feet, prefect, he snapped.
we at infinidim enterprises are...
you at what?
infinidim enterprises. we have bought out the guide.
infinidim?
we spent millions on that name, prefect. start liking it or start packing.
ford shrugged. he had nothing to pack.
the galaxy is changing, said harl. weve got to change with it. go with
the market. the market is moving up. new aspirations. new technology. the
future is...
dont tell me about the future, said ford. ive been all over the future.
spend half my time there. it s the same as anywhere else. anywhen else.
whatever. just the same old stuff in faster cars and smellier air.
thats one future, said harl. thats your future, if you accept it. youve
got to learn to think multi-dimensionally. there are limitless futures stretch-
ing out in every direction from this moment - and from this moment and from
this. billions of them, bifurcating every instant! every possible position of
every possible electron balloons out into billions of probabilities! bil- lions
and billions of shining, gleaming futures! you know what that means?
youre dribbling down your chin.
billions and billions of markets!
i see, said ford. so you sell billions and billions of guides.
no, said harl, reaching for his handkerchief and not finding one. excuse
me, he said, but this gets me so excited. ford handed him his towel.
the reason we dont sell billions and billions of guides, continued harl, after
wiping his mouth, is the expense. what we do is we sell one guide billions
and billions of times. we exploit the multidimensional nature of the universe
to cut down on manufacturing costs. and we dont sell to penniless hitch hik-
ers. what a stupid notion that was! find the one section of the market that,
more or less by definition, doesnt have any money, and try and sell to it. no.
we sell to the affluent business traveller and his vacationing wife in a billion,
billion different futures . this is the most radical, dynamic and thrusting busi-
ness venture in the entire multidimensional infinity of space/time/probability
ever.
and you want me to be its restaurant critic, said ford.
we would value your input.
kill! shouted ford. he shouted it at his towel.
the towel leapt up out of harls hands.
this was not because it had any motive force of its own, but because harl was

45

so startled at the idea that it might. the next thing that startled him was the
sight of ford prefect hurtling across the desk at him fists first. in fact ford
was just lunging for the credit card, but you dont get to occupy the sort of
position that harl occupied in the sort of organisation in which harl occupied
it without developing a healthily paranoid view of life. he took the sensible
precaution of hurling himself backwards, and striking his head a sharp blow
on the rocket-proof glass, then subsided into a series of worrying and highly
personal dreams.
ford lay on the desk, surprised at how swimmingly every- thing had gone. he
glanced quickly at the piece of plastic he now held in his hand - it was a dine-
o-charge credit card with his name already embossed on it, and an expiry
date two years from now, and was possibly the single most exciting thing ford
had ever seen in his life - then he clambered over the desk to see to harl.
he was breathing fairly easily. it occurred to ford that he might breathe more
easily yet without the weight of his wallet bearing down on his chest, so he
slipped it out of harls breast pocket and flipped through it. fair amount of
cash. credit tokens. ultragolf club membership. other club memberships.
photos of someones wife and family - presumably harls, but it was hard to
be sure these days. busy executives often didnt have time for a full-time wife
and family and would just rent them for weekends.
ha!
he couldnt believe what hed just found.
he slowly drew out from the wallet a single and insanely exciting piece of plas-
tic that was nestling amongst a bunch of receipts.
it wasnt insanely exciting to look at. it was rather dull in fact. it was smaller
and a little thicker than a credit card and semi-transparent. if you held it up
to the light you could see a lot of holographically encoded information and
images buried pseudo-inches deep beneath its surface .
it was an ident-i-eeze, and was a very naughty and silly thing for harl to have
lying around in his wallet, though it was perfectly understandable. there were
so many different ways in which you were required to provide absolute proof
of your iden- tity these days that life could easily become extremely tiresome
just from that factor alone, never mind the deeper existential problems of try-
ing to function as a coherent consciousness in an epistemologically ambiguous
physical universe. just look at cash point machines, for instance. queues of
people standing around waiting to have their fingerprints read, their retinas
scanned, bits of skin scraped from the nape of the neck and undergoing in-
stant (or nearly instant - a good six or seven seconds in tedious reality) genetic
analysis, then having to answer trick questions about members of their family
they didnt even remember they had, and about their recorded preferences

46

chapter 6.

for tablecloth colours. and that was just to get a bit of spare cash for the
weekend. if you were trying to raise a loan for a jetcar, sign a missile treaty
or pay an entire restaurant bill things could get really trying.
hence the ident-i-eeze. this encoded every single piece of information about
you, your body and your life into one all- purpose machine-readable card that
you could then carry around in your wallet, and therefore represented technol-
ogys greatest triumph to date over both itself and plain common sense.
ford pocketed it. a remarkably good idea had just occurred to him. he won-
dered how long harl would remain unconscious.
hey! he shouted to the little melon-sized robot still slobbering with euphoria
up on the ceiling. you want to stay happy?
the robot gurgled that it did.
then stick with me and do everything i tell you without fail.
the robot said that it was quite happy where it was up on the ceiling thank
you very much. it had never realised before how much sheer titillation there
was to be got from a good ceiling and it wanted to explore its feelings about
ceilings in greater depth.
you stay there, said ford, and youll soon be recaptured and have your
conditional chip replaced. you want to stay happy, come now.
the robot let out a long heartfelt sigh of impassioned tristesse and sank reluc-
tantly away from the ceiling.
listen, said ford, can you keep the rest of the security system happy for a
few minutes?
one of the joys of true happiness, trilled the robot, is sharing. i brim, i
froth, i overflow with...
ok, said ford. just spread a little happiness around the security network.
dont give it any information. just make it feel good so it doesnt feel the
need to ask for any.
he picked up his towel and ran cheerfully for the door. life had been a little
dull of late. it showed every sign now of becoming extremely froody.



arthur dent had been in some hell-holes in his life, but he had never be-
fore seen a spaceport which had a sign saying, even travelling despondently
is better than arriving here. to welcome visitors the arrivals hall featured a
picture of the president of nowwhat, smiling. it was the only picture anybody
could find of him, and it had been taken shortly after he had shot himself so
although the photo had been retouched as well as could be managed the smile
it wore was rather a ghastly one. the side of his head had been drawn back
in in crayon. no replacement had been found for the photograph because no
replacement had been found for the president. there was only one ambition
which anyone on the planet ever had, and that was to leave.
arthur checked himself into a small motel on the outskirts of town, and sat
glumly on the bed, which was damp, and flipped through the little information
brochure, which was also damp. it said that the planet of nowwhat had been
named after the open- ing words of the first settlers to arrive there after strug-
gling across light years of space to reach the furthest unexplored outreaches
of the galaxy. the main town was called ohwell. there werent any other
towns to speak of. settlement on nowwhat had not been a success and the
sort of people who actually wanted to live on nowwhat were not the sort of
people you would want to spend time with.
trading was mentioned in the brochure. the main trade that was carried out
was in the skins of the nowwhattian boghog but it wasnt a very successful
one because no one in their right minds would want to buy a nowwhattian
boghog skin. the trade only hung on by its fingernails because there was
always a significant number of people in the galaxy who were not in their
right minds. arthur had felt very uncomfortable looking around at some of
the other occupants of the small passenger compartment of the ship.
the brochure described some of the history of the planet. whoever had writ-
ten it had obviously started out trying to drum up a little enthusiasm for the48

chapter 7.

place by stressing that it wasnt actually cold and wet all the time, but could
find little positive to add to this so the tone of the piece quickly degenerated
into savage irony.
it talked about the early years of settlement. it said that the major activities
pursued on nowwhat were those of catching, skinning and eating nowwhat-
tian boghogs, which were the only extant form of animal life on nowwhat,
all other having long ago died of despair. the boghogs were tiny, vicious
creatures, and the small margin by which they fell short of being completely
inedible was the margin by which life on the planet subsisted. so what were
the rewards, however small, that made life on nowwhat worth living? well,
there werent any. not a one. even making yourself some protective clothing
out of boghog skins was an exercise in disappointment and futility, since the
skins were unaccountably thin and leaky. this caused a lot of puzzled con-
jecture amongst the settlers. what was the boghogs secret of keeping warm?
if anyone had ever learnt the language the boghogs spoke to each other they
would have discovered that there was no trick. the boghogs were as cold and
wet as anyone else on the planet. no one had had the slightest desire to learn
the language of the boghogs for the simple reason that these creatures commu-
nicated by biting each other very hard on the thigh. life on nowwhat being
what it was, most of what a boghog might have to say about it could easily
be signified by these means.
arthur flipped through the brochure till he found what he was looking for.
at the back there were a few maps of the planet. they were fairly rough and
ready because they werent likely to be of much interest to anyone, but they
told him what he wanted to know.
he didnt recognise it at first because the maps were the other way up from
the way he would have expected and looked, therefore thoroughly unfamiliar.
of course, up and down, north and south, are absolutely arbitrary designa-
tions, but we are used to seeing things the way we are used to seeing them,
and arthur had to turn the maps upside-down to make sense of them.
there was one huge landmass off on the upper left-hand side of the page which
tapered down to a tiny waist and then ballooned out again like a large comma.
on the right-hand side was a collection of large shapes jumbled familiarly to-
gether. the outlines were not exactly the same, and arthur didnt know if
this was because the map was so rough, or because the sea-level was higher or
because, well, things were just different here. but the evidence was inarguable.
this was definitely the earth.
or rather, it most definitely was not.
it merely looked a lot like the earth and occupied the same co-ordinates in
space/time. what co-ordinates it occupied in probability was anybodys guess.

49

he sighed.
this, he realised, was about as close to home as he was likely to get. which
meant that he was about as far from home as he could possibly be. glumly
he slapped the brochure shut and wondered what on earth he was going to do
next.
he allowed himself a hollow laugh at what he had just thought. he looked at
his old watch, and shook it a bit to wind it. it had taken him, according to his
own time-scale, a year of hard travelling to get here. a year since the accident
in hyperspace in which fenchurch had completely vanished. one minute she
had been sitting there next to him in the slumpjet; the next minute the ship
had done a perfectly normal hyperspace hop and when he had next looked
she was not there. the seat wasnt even warm. her name wasnt even on the
passenger list.
the spaceline had been wary of him when he had complained. a lot of awk-
ward things happen in space travel, and a lot of them make a lot of money for
lawyers. but when they had asked him what galactic sector he and fenchurch
had been from and he had said zz9 plural z alpha they had relaxed completely
in a way that arthur wasnt at all sure he liked. they even laughed a little,
though sympathetically, of course. they pointed to the clause in the ticket
contract which said that the entities whose lifespans had originated in any of
the plural zones were advised not to travel in hyperspace and did so at their
own risk. every- body, they said, knew that. they tittered slightly and shook
their heads.
as arthur had left their offices he found he was trembling slightly. not only
had he lost fenchurch in the most complete and utter way possible, but he felt
that the more time he spent away out in the galaxy the more it seemed that
the number of things he didnt know anything about actually increased.
just as he was lost for a moment in these numb memories a knock came on the
door of his motel room, which then opened immediately. a fat and dishevelled
man came in carrying arthurs one small case.
he got as far as, where shall i put - when there was a sudden violent flurry
and he collapsed heavily against the door, trying to beat off a small and mangy
creature that had leapt snarling out of the wet night and buried its teeth in his
thigh, even through the thick layers of leather padding he wore there. there
was a brief, ugly confusion of jabbering and thrash- ing. the man shouted
frantically and pointed. arthur grabbed a hefty stick that stood next to the
door expressly for this purpose and beat at the boghog with it.
the boghog suddenly disengaged and limped backwards, dazed and forlorn.
it turned anxiously in the corner of the room, its tail tucked up right under
its back legs, and stood looking nervously up at arthur, jerking its head awk-

50

chapter 7.

wardly and repeatedly to one side. its jaw seemed to be dislocated. it cried
a little and scraped its damp tail across the floor. by the door, the fat man
with arthurs suitcase was sitting and cursing, trying to staunch the flow of
blood from his thigh. his clothes were already wet from the rain.
arthur stared at the boghog, not knowing what to do. the boghog looked at
him questioningly. it tried to approach him, waking mournful little whimper-
ing noises. it moved its jaw pain- fully. it made a sudden leap for arthurs
thigh, but its dislocated jaw was too weak to get a grip and it sank, whining
sadly, down to the floor. the fat man jumped to his feet, grabbed the stick,
beat the boghogs brains into a sticky, pulpy mess on the thin carpet, and then
stood there breathing heavily as if daring the animal to move again, just once.
a single boghog eyeball sat looking reproachfully at arthur from out of the
mashed ruins of its head.
what do you think it was trying to say? asked arthur in a small voice.
ah, nothing much, said the man just its way of trying to be friendly. this
is just our way of being friendly back, he added, gripping the stick.
whens the next flight out? asked arthur.
thought youd only just arrived, said the man.
yes, said arthur. it was only going to be a brief visit. i just wanted to see
if this was the right place or not. sorry.
you mean youre on the wrong planet? said the man lugu- briously. funny
how many people say that. specially the people who live here. he eyed the
remains of the boghog with a deep, ancestral resentment.
oh no, said arthur, its the right planet all right. he picked up the damp
brochure lying on the bed and put it in his pocket. its ok, thanks, ill take
that, he said, taking his case from the man. he went to the door and looked
out into the cold, wet night.
yes, its the right planet, all right, he said again. right planet, wrong
universe.
a single bird wheeled in the sky above him as he set off back for the spaceport.



ford had his own code of ethics. it wasnt much of one, but it was his and he
stuck by it, more or less. one rule he made was never to buy his own drinks.
he wasnt sure if that counted as an ethic, but you have to go with what youve
got. he was also firmly and utterly opposed to all and any forms of cruelty to
any animals whatsoever except geese. and furthermore he would never steal
from his employers.
well, not exactly steal.
if his accounts supervisor didnt start to hyperventilate and put out a seal-all-
exits security alert when ford handed in his expenses claim then ford felt he
wasnt doing his job properly. but actually stealing was another thing. that
was biting the hand that feeds you. sucking very hard on it, even nibbling it
in an affectionate kind of a way was ok, but you didnt actually bite it. not
when that hand was the guide. the guide was something sacred and special.
but that, thought ford as he ducked and weaved his way down through the
building, was about to change. and they had only themselves to blame. look
at all this stuff. lines of neat grey office cubicles and executive workstation
pods. the whole place was dreary with the hum of memos and minutes of
meetings flitting through its electronic networks. out in the street they were
playing hunt the wocket for zarks sake, but here in the very heart of the
guide offices no one was even recklessly kicking a ball around the corridors or
wearing inappropriately coloured beachware.
infinidim enterprises, ford snarled to himself as he stalked rapidly down
one corridor after another. door after door magi- cally opened to him without
question. elevators took him happily to places they should not. ford was
trying to pursue the most tangled and complicated route he could, heading
generally down- wards through the building. his happy little robot took care
of everything, spreading waves of acquiescent joy through all the security cir-
cuits it encountered.52

chapter 8.

ford thought it needed a name and decided to call it emily saunders, after a
girl he had very fond memories of. then he thought that emily saunders was
an absurd name for a security robot, and decided to call it colin instead, after
emilys dog.
he was moving deep into the bowels of the building now, into areas he had
never entered before, areas of higher and higher security. he was beginning to
encounter puzzled looks from the operatives he passed. at this level of secu-
rity you didnt even call them people anymore. and they were probably doing
stuff that only operatives would do. when they went home to their families
in the evening they became people again, and when their little children looked
up to them with their sweet shining eyes and said daddy, what did you do
all day today? they just said, i performed my duties as an operative, and
left it at that.
the truth of the matter was that all sorts of highly dodgy stuff went on behind
the cheery, happy-go-lucky front that the guide liked to put up - or used to
like to put up before this new infinidim enterprises bunch marched in and
started to make the whole thing highly dodgy. there were all kinds of tax
scams and rackets and graft and shady deals supporting the shining edifice,
and down in the secure research and data-processing levels of the building was
where it all went on.
every few years the guide would set up its business, and indeed its building
on a new world, and all would be sunshine and laughter for a while as the
guide would put down its roots in the local culture and economy, provide
employment, a sense of glamour and adventure and, in the end, not quite as
much actual revenue as the locals had expected.
when the guide moved on, taking its building with it, it left a little like a
thief in the night. exactly like a thief in the night in fact. it usually left in the
very early hours of the morning, and the following day there always turned out
to be a very great deal of stuff missing. whole cultures and economies would
collapse in its wake, often within a week, leaving once thriving planets desolate
and shell-shocked but still somehow feeling they had been part of some great
adven- ture.
the operatives who shot puzzled glances at ford as he marched on into the
depths of the buildings most sensitive areas were reassured by the presence of
colin, who was flying along with him in a buzz of emotional fulfilment and
easing his path for him at every stage.
alarms were starting to go off in other parts of the building. perhaps that
meant that vann harl had already been discovered, which might be a problem.
ford had been hoping he would be able to slip the ident-i-eeze back into his
pocket before he came round. well, that was a problem for later, and he didnt

53

for the moment have the faintest idea how he was going to solve it. for the
moment he wasnt going to worry. wherever he went with little colin, he was
surrounded by a cocoon of sweetness and light and, most importantly, willing
and acquiescent elevators and positively obsequious doors.
ford even began to whistle, which was probably his mistake. nobody likes a
whistler, particularly not the divinity that shapes our ends.
the next door wouldnt open.
and that was a pity, because it was the very one that ford had been making
for. it stood there before him, grey and resolutely closed with a sign on it
saying:

not even to authorised personnel.

you are wasting your time here.

no admittance.

go away.

colin reported that the doors had been getting generally a lot grimmer

down in these lower reaches of the building.
they were about ten stories below ground level now. the air was refrigerated
and the tasteful grey hessian wall-weave had given way to brutal grey bolted
steel walls. colins rampant euphoria had subsided into a kind of determined
cheeriness. he said that he was beginning to tire a little. it was taking all his
energy to pump the slightest bonhomie whatsoever into the doors down here.
ford kicked at the door. it opened.
mixture of pleasure and pain, he muttered. always does the trick.
he walked in and colin flew in after him. even with a wire stuck straight
into his pleasure electrode his happiness was a nervous kind of happiness. he
bobbed around a little.
the room was small, grey and humming.
this was the nerve centre of the entire guide.
the computer terminals that lined the grey walls were win- dows on to every
aspect of the guides operations. here, on the left-hand side of the room,
reports were gathered over the sub- etha-net from field researchers in every
corner of the galaxy, fed straight up into the network of sub-editors offices
where they had all the good bits cut out by secretaries because the sub-editors
were out having lunch. the remaining copy would then be shot across to the
other half of the building - the other leg of the h - which was the legal de-
partment. the legal department would cut out anything that was still even
remotely good from what remained and fire it back to the offices of the ex-
ecutive editors, who were also out at lunch. so the editors secretaries would

54

chapter 8.

read it and say it was stupid and cut most of what was left.
when any of the editors finally staggered in from lunch they would exclaim
what is this feeble crap that x - where x was the name of the field re-
searcher in question - has sent us from half-way across the bloody galaxy?
whats the point of having somebody spending three whole orbital periods
out in the bloody gagrakacka mind zones, with all that stuff going on out
there, if this load of anaemic squitter is the best he can be bothered to send
us. disallow his expenses!
what shall we do with the copy? the secretary would ask.
ah, put it out over the network. got to have something going out there. ive
got a headache, im going home.
so the edited copy would go for one last slash and burn through the legal
department, and then be sent back down here where it would be broadcast
out over the sub-etha-net for instantaneous retrieval anywhere in the galaxy.
that was handled by equipment which was monitored and controlled by the
terminals on the right-hand side of the room.
meanwhile the order to disallow the researchers expenses was relayed down
to the computer terminal stuck off in the right-hand corner, and it was to this
terminal that ford prefect now swiftly made his way.
(if you are reading this on planet earth then:
a) good luck to you. there is an awful lot of stuff you dont know anything
about, but you are not alone in this. its just that in your case the consequences
of not knowing any of this stuff are particularly terrible, but then, hey, thats
just the way the cookie gets completely stomped on and obliterated.
b) dont imagine you know what a computer terminal is.
a computer terminal is not some clunky old television with a typewriter in
front of it. it is an interface where the mind and body can connect with the
universe and move bits of it about.)
ford hurried over to the terminal, sat in front of it and quickly dipped himself
into its universe.
it wasnt the normal universe he knew.
it was a universe of densely en-
folded worlds, of wild topographies, towering moun- tain peaks, heart stop-
ping ravines, of moons shattering off into sea horses, hurtful blurting crevices,
silently heaving oceans and bottomless hurtling hooping funts.
he held still to get his bearings. he controlled his breathing, closed his eyes
and looked again.
so this was where accountants spent their time. there was clearly more to
them than met the eye. he looked around carefully, trying not to let it all
swell and swim and overwhelm him.
he didnt know his way around this universe. he didnt even know the physical

55

laws that determined its dimensional extents or behaviours, but his instinct
told him to look for the most outstanding feature he could detect and make
towards it.
way off in some indistinguishable distance - was it a mile or a million or a mote
in his eye? - was a stunning peak that overarched the sky, climbed and climbed
and spread out in flowering aigrettes 1, agglomerates 2, and arch imandrites
3.
he weltered towards it, hooling and thurling, and at last reached it in a mean-
inglessly long umthingth of time.
he clung to it, arms outspread, gripping tightly on to its roughly gnarled and
pitted surface. once he was certain that he was secure he made the hideous
mistake of looking down.
while he had been weltering, hooling and thurling, the distance beneath him
had not bothered him unduly, but now that he was

1 an ornamental tuft of plumes. 2 a jumbled mass. 3 a cleric ranking

below a bishop.

gripping, the distance made his heart wilt and his brain bend. his fingers
were white with pain and tension. his teeth were grinding and twisting against
each other beyond his control. his eyes turned inwards with waves from the
willowing extremities of nausea.
with an immense effort of will and faith he simply let go and pushed.
he felt himself float. away. and then, counter-intuitively, upwards. and
upwards.
he threw his shoulders back, let his arms drop, gazed upwards and let himself
be drawn loosely, higher and higher.
before long, insofar as such terms had any meaning in this virtual universe,
a ledge loomed up ahead of him on which he could grip and on to which he
could clamber.
he rose, he gripped, he clambered.
he panted a little. this was all a little stressful.
he held tightly on to the ledge as he sat. he wasnt certain if this was to
prevent himself from falling down off it or rising up from it, but he needed
something to grip on to as he surveyed the world in which he found himself.
the whirling, turning height span him and twisted his brain in upon itself
till he found himself, eyes closed, whimpering and hugging the hideous wall of
towering rock.
he slowly brought his breathing back under control again. he told himself
repeatedly that he was just in a graphic rep- resentation of a world. a virtual

56

chapter 8.

universe. a simulated reality. he could snap back out of it at any moment.
he snapped back out of it.
he was sitting in a blue leatherette foam filled swivel-seated office chair in
front of a computer terminal.
he relaxed.
he was clinging to the face of an impossibly high peak perched on a narrow
ledge above a drop of brain-swivelling dimensions.
it wasnt just the landscape being so far beneath him - he wished it would stop
undulating and waving.
he had to get a grip. not on the rock wall - that was an illusion. he had to
get a grip on the situation, be able to look at the physical world he was in
while drawing himself out of it emotionally.
he clenched inwardly and then, just as he had let go of the rock face itself,
he let go of the idea of the rock face and let himself just sit there clearly and
freely. he looked out at the world. he was breathing well. he was cool. he
was in charge again.
he was in a four-dimensional topological model of the guides financial sys-
tems, and somebody or something would very shortly want to know why.
and here they came.
swooping through virtual space towards him came a small flock of mean and
steely-eyed creatures with pointy little heads, pencil moustaches and querulous
demands as to who he was, what he was doing there, what his authorisation
was, what the authorisation of his authorising agent was, what his inside leg
measurement was and so on. laser light flickered all over him as if he was
a packet of biscuits at a supermarket check-out. the heavier duty laser guns
were held, for the moment, in reserve. the fact that all of this was happening
in virtual space made no difference. being virtually killed by a virtual laser in
virtual space is just as effective as the real thing, because you are as dead as
you think you are.
the laser readers were becoming very agitated as they flickered over his fingerprints,
his retina and the follicle pattern where his hair line was receding. they didnt
like what they were finding at all. the chattering and screeching of highly per-
sonal and insolent questions was rising in pitch. a little surgical steel scraper
was reaching out towards the skin at the nape of his neck when ford, holding
his breath and praying very slightly, pulled vann harls ident-i-eeze out of his
pocket and waved it in front of them.
instantly every laser was diverted to the little card and swept backwards and
forwards over it and in it, examining and reading every molecule.
then, just as suddenly, they stopped.
the entire flock of little virtual inspectors snapped to attention.

57

nice to see you, mr harl, they said in smarmy unison. is there anything
we can do for you?
ford smiled a slow and vicious smile.
do you know, he said, i rather think there is?

five minutes later he was out of there.

about thirty seconds to do the job, and three minutes thirty to cover his
tracks. he could have done anything he liked in the virtual structure, more
or less. he could have transferred ownership of the entire organisation into
his own name, but he doubted if that would have gone unnoticed. he didnt
want it anyway. it would have meant responsibility, working late nights at the
office, not to mention massive and time-consuming fraud investigations and a
fair amount of time in jail. he wanted something that nobody other than the
computer would notice: that was the bit that took thirty seconds.
the thing that took three minutes thirty was programming the computer not
to notice that it had noticed anything.
it had to want not to know about what ford was up to, and then he could safely
leave the computer to rationalise its own defences against the information ever
emerging. it was a pro- gramming technique that had been reverse-engineered
from the sort of psychotic mental blocks that otherwise perfectly normal people
had been observed invariably to develop when elected to high political office.
the other minute was spent discovering that the computer system already had
a mental block. a big one.
he would never have discovered it if he hadnt been busy engineering a mental
block himself. he came across a whole slew of smooth and plausible denial
procedures and diversionary subroutines exactly where he had been planning
to install his own. the computer denied all knowledge of them, of course, then
blankly refused to accept that there was anything even to deny knowledge of,
and was generally so convincing that even ford almost found himself thinking
he must have made a mistake.
he was impressed.
he was so impressed, in fact, that he didnt bother to install his own mental
block procedures, he just set up calls to the ones that were already there, which
then called themselves when ques- tioned, and so on.
he quickly set about debugging the little bits of code he had installed himself,
only to discover they werent there. cursing, he searched all over for them,
but could find no trace of them at all.
he was just about to start installing them all over again when he realised that
the reason he couldnt find them was that they were working already.
he grinned with satisfaction.

58

chapter 8.

he tried to discover what the computers other mental block was all about,
but it seemed, not unnaturally, to have a mental block about it. he could no
longer find any trace of it at all, in fact; it was that good. he wondered if
he had been imagining it. he wondered if he had been imagining that it was
something to do with something in the building, and something to do with the
number 13. he ran a few tests. yes, he had obviously been imagining it.

no time for fancy routes now, there was obviously a major security alert
in progress. ford took the elevator up to the ground floor to change to the
express elevators. he had somehow to get the ident-i-eeze back into harls
pocket before it was missed. how, he didnt know.
the doors of the elevator slid open to reveal a large posse of security guards
and robots poised waiting for it and brandishing filthy looking weapons.
they ordered him out.
with a shrug he stepped forward. they all pushed rudely past him into the
elevator which took them down to continue their search for him on the lower
levels.
this was fun, thought ford, giving colin a friendly pat. colin was about the
first genuinely useful robot ford had ever encountered. colin bobbed along
in the air in front of him in a lather of cheerful ecstasy. ford was glad hed
named him after a dog.
he was highly tempted just to leave at that point and hope for the best, but
he knew that the best had a far greater chance of actually occurring if harl
did not discover that his ident-i-eeze was missing. he had somehow, surrep-
titiously, to return it.
they went to the express elevators.
hi, said the elevator they got into.
hi, said ford.
where can i take you folks today? said the elevator.
floor 23, said ford.
seems to be a popular floor today, said the elevator.
hmm, thought ford, not liking the sound of that at all. the elevator lit
up the twenty-third floor on its floor display and started to zoom upwards.
something about the floor display tweaked at fords mind but he couldnt
catch what it was and forgot about it. he was more worried about the idea
of the floor he was going to being a popular one. he hadnt really thought
through how he was going to deal with whatever it was that was happening
up there because he had no idea what he was going to find. he would just
have to busk it.
they were there.

59

the doors slid open.
ominous quiet.
empty corridor.
there was the door to harls office, with a slight layer of dust around it. ford
knew that this dust consisted of billions of tiny molecular robots that had
crawled out of the woodwork, built each other, rebuilt the door , disassembled
each other and then crept back into the woodwork again and just waited for
damage. ford wondered what kind of life that was, but not for long because
he was a lot more concerned about what his own life was like at that moment.
he took a deep breath and started his run.

60

chapter 8.



arthur felt at a bit of a loss. there was a whole galaxy of stuff out there for
him, and he wondered if it was churlish of him to complain to himself that it
lacked just two things: the world he was born on and the woman he loved.
damn it and blast it, he thought, and felt the need of some guidance and
advice. he consulted the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy. he looked up
guidance and it said see under advice. he looked up advice and it
said see under guid- ance. it had been doing a lot of that kind of stuff
recently and he wondered if it was all it was cracked up to be.
he headed to the outer eastern rim of the galaxy where, it was said, wisdom
and truth were to be found, most particularly on the planet hawalius, which
was a planet of oracles and seers and soothsayers and also take-away pizza
shops, because most mystics were completely incapable of cooking for them-
selves.
however it appeared that some sort of calamity had befallen this planet. as
arthur wandered the streets of the village where the major prophets lived,
it had something of a crestfallen air. he came across one prophet who was
clearly shutting up shop in a despondent kind of way and asked him what was
happening.
no call for us any more, he said gruffly as he started to bang a nail into the
plank he was holding across the window of his hovel.
oh? whys that?
hold on to the other end of this and ill show you.
arthur held up the unnailed end of the plank and the old prophet scuttled
into the recesses of his hovel, returning a moment or two later with a small
sub-etha radio. he turned it on, fiddled with the dial for a moment and put
the thing on the small wooden bench that he usually sat and prophesied on.
he then took hold of the plank again and resumed hammering.
arthur sat and listened to the radio.62

chapter 9.

...be confirmed, said the radio.
tomorrow, it continued, the vice-president of poffla vigus, roopy ga
stip, will announce that he intends to run for presi- dent. in a speech he will
give tomorrow at...
find another channel, said the prophet. arthur pushed the preset button.
...refused to comment, said the radio. next weeks jobless totals in the
zabush sector, it continued, will be the worst since records began. a report
published next month says...
find another, barked the prophet, crossly. arthur pushed the button again.
...denied it categorically, said the radio. next months royal wedding be-
tween prince gid of the soofling dynasty and princess hooli of raui alpha
will be the most spectacular ceremony the bjanjy territories has ever wit-
nessed. our reporter trillian astra is there and sends us this report.
arthur blinked.
the sound of cheering crowds and a hubbub of brass bands erupted from the
radio. a very familiar voice said, well krart, the scene here in the middle of
next month is absolutely incred- ible. princess hooli is looking radiant in a...
the prophet swiped the radio off the bench and on to the dusty ground, where
it squawked like a badly tuned chicken.
see what we have to contend with? grumbled the prophet. here, hold this.
not that, this. no, not like that. this way up. other way round, you fool.
i was listening to that, complained arthur, grappling help- lessly with the
prophets hammer.
so does everybody. thats why this place is like a ghost town. he spat into
the dust.
no, i mean, that sounded like someone i knew.
princess hooli? if i had to stand around saying hello to everybody whos
known princess hooli id need a new set of lungs.
not the princess, said arthur. the reporter. her names trillian. i dont
know where she got the astra from. shes from the same planet as me.
i
wondered where shed got to.
oh, shes all over the continuum these days. we cant get the tri-d tv sta-
tions out here of course, thank the great green arkleseizure, but you hear her
on the radio, gallivanting here and there through space/time. she wants to
settle down and find herself a steady era that young lady does. itll all end in
tears. probably already has. he swung with his hammer and hit his thumb
rather hard. he started to speak in tongues.

the village of oracles wasnt much better.

he had been told that when looking for a good oracle it was best to find the

63

oracle that other oracles went to, but he was shut. there was a sign by the
entrance saying, i just dont know any more. try next door, but thats just
a suggestion, not formal oracular advice.
next door was a cave a few hundred yards away and arthur walked to-
wards it. smoke and steam were rising from, respec- tively, a small fire and a
battered tin pot that was hanging over it. there was also a very nasty smell
coming from the pot. at least arthur thought it was coming from the pot. the
distended bladders of some of the local goat-like things were hanging from a
propped-up line drying in the sun, and the smell could have been coming from
them. there was also, a worryingly small distance away, a pile of discarded
bodies of the local goat-like things and the smell could have been coming from
them.
but the smell could just as easily have been coming from the old lady who was
busy beating flies away from the pile of bodies. it was a hopeless task because
each of the flies was about the size of a winged bottle top and all she had was a
table tennis bat. also she seemed half blind. every now and then, by chance,
her wild thrashing would connect with one of the flies with a richly satisfying
thunk, and the fly would hurtle through the air and smack itself open against
the rock face a few yards from the entrance to her cave.
she gave every impression, by her demeanour, that these were the moments
she lived for.
arthur watched this exotic performance for a while from a polite distance, and
then at last tried giving a gentle cough to attract her attention. the gentle
cough, courteously meant, unfortunately involved first inhaling rather more of
the local atmosphere than he had so far been doing and as a result, he erupted
into a fit of raucous expectoration, and collapsed against the rock face, chok-
ing and streaming with tears. he struggled for breath, but each new breath
made things worse. he vomited, half-choked again, rolled over his vomit, kept
rolling for a few yards, and eventually made it up on to his hands and knees
and crawled, panting, into slightly fresher air.
excuse me, he said. he got some breath back. i really am most dreadfully
sorry. i feel a complete idiot and... he gestured helplessly towards the small
pile of his own vomit lying spread around the entrance to her cave.
what can i say? he said. what can i possibly say?
this at least had gained her attention. she looked round at him suspiciously,
but, being half blind, had difficulty finding him in the blurred and rocky land-
scape.
he waved, helpfully. hello! he called.
at last she spotted him, grunted to herself and turned back to whacking flies.
it was horribly apparent from the way that currents of air moved when she

64

chapter 9.

did, that the major source of the smell was in fact her. the drying bladders,
the festering bodies and the noxious potage may all have been making violent
contributions to the atmosphere, but the major olfactory presence was the
woman herself.
she got another good thwack at a fly. it smacked against the rock and dribbled
its insides down it in what she clearly regarded, if she could see that far, as a
satisfactory manner.
unsteadily, arthur got to his feet and brushed himself down with a fistful of
dried grass. he didnt know what else to do by way of announcing himself. he
had half a mind just to wander off again, but felt awkward about leaving a
pile of his vomit in front of the entrance to the womans home. he wondered
what to do about it. he started to pluck up more handsful of the scrubby
dried grass that was to be found here and there. he was worried, though, that
if he ventured nearer to the vomit he might simply add to it rather than clear
it up.
just as he was debating with himself as to what the right course of action was
he began to realise that she was at last saying something to him.
i beg your pardon? he called out.
i said, can i help you? she said, in a thin, scratchy voice. that he could only
just hear.
er, i came to ask your advice, he called back, feeling a bit ridiculous.
she turned to peer at him, myopically, then turned back, swiped at a fly and
missed.
what about? she said.
i beg your pardon? he said.
i said, what about? she almost screeched.
well, said arthur. just sort of general advice, really. it said in the brochure
-
ha! brochure! spat the old woman. she seemed to be waving her bat more
or less at random now.
arthur fished the crumpled-up brochure from his pocket. he wasnt quite cer-
tain why. he had already read it and she, he expected, wouldnt want to. he
unfolded it anyway in order to have something to frown thoughtfully at for
a moment or two. the copy in the brochure wittered on about the ancient
mystical arts of the seers and sages of hawalius, and wild- ly over-represented
the level of accommodation available in hawalion. arthur still carried a copy
of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy with him but found, when he con-
sulted it, that the entries were becoming more abstruse and paranoid and had
lots of xs and js and s in them. something was wrong somewhere. whether
it was in his own personal unit, or whether it was something or someone going

65

terribly amiss, or perhaps just hallucinating, at the heart of the guide organi-
sation itself, he didnt know. but one way or another he was even less inclined
to trust it than usual, which meant that he trusted it not one bit, and mostly
used it for eating his sandwiches off when he was sitting on a rock staring at
something.
the woman had turned and was walking slowly towards him now. arthur
tried, without making it too obvious, to judge the wind direction, and bobbed
about a bit as she approached.
advice, she said. advice, eh?
er, yes, said arthur. yes, that is -
he frowned again at the brochure, as if to be certain that he hadnt misread it
and stupidly turned up on the wrong planet or something. the brochure said
the friendly local inhabitants will be glad to share with you the knowledge
and wisdom of the ancients. peer with them into the swirling mysteries of past
and future time! there were some coupons as well, but arthur had been far
too embarrassed actually to cut them out or try to present them to anybody.
advice, eh, said the old woman again. just sort of general advice, you say.
on what? what to do with your life, that sort of thing?
yes, said arthur. that sort of thing. bit of a problem i sometimes find
if im being perfectly honest. he was trying desperately, with tiny darting
movements, to stay upwind of her. she surprised him by suddenly turning
sharply away from him and heading off towards her cave.
youll have to help me with the photocopier, then, she said.
what? said arthur.
the photocopier, she repeated, patiently. youll have to help me drag it
out. its solar-powered. i have to keep it in the cave, though, so the birds
dont shit on it.
i see, said arthur.
id take a few deep breaths if i were you, muttered the old woman, as she
stomped into the gloom of the cave mouth.
arthur did as she advised. he almost hyperventilated in fact. when he felt
he was ready, he held his breath and followed her in.
the photocopier was a big old thing on a rickety trolley. it stood just inside
the dim shadows of the cave. the wheels were stuck obstinately in different
directions and the ground was rough and stony.
go ahead and take a breath outside, said the old woman. arthur was going
red in the face trying to help her move the thing.
he nodded in relief. if she wasnt going to be embarrassed about it then nei-
ther, he was determined, would he. he stepped outside and took a few breaths,
then came back in to do more heaving and pushing. he had to do this quite a

66

chapter 9.

few times till at last the machine was outside.
the sun beat down on it. the old woman disappeared back into her cave again
and brought with her some mottled metal panels, which she connected to the
machine to collect the suns energy.
she squinted up into the sky. the sun was quite bright, but the day was hazy
and vague.
itll take a while, she said.
arthur said he was happy to wait.
the old woman shrugged and stomped across to the fire. above it, the con-
tents of the tin can were bubbling away. she poked about at them with a stick.
you wont be wanting any lunch? she enquired of arthur.
ive eaten, thanks, said arthur. no, really. ive eaten.
im sure you have, said the old lady. she stirred with the stick. after a few
minutes she fished a lump of some- thing out, blew on it to cool it a little, and
then put it in her mouth.
she chewed on it thoughtfully for a bit.
then she hobbled slowly across to the pile of dead goat-like things. she spat
the lump out on to the pile. she hobbled slowly back to the can. she tried to
unhook it from the sort of tripod-like thing that it was hanging from.
can i help you? said arthur, jumping up politely. he hurried over.
together they disengaged the tin from the tripod and carried it awkwardly
down the slight slope that led downwards from her cave and towards a line of
scrubby and gnarled trees, which marked the edge of a steep but quite shallow
gully, from, which a whole new range of offensive smells was emanating.
ready? said the old lady.
yes... said arthur, though he didnt know for what.
one, said the old lady.
two, she said.
three, she added.
arthur realised just in time what she intended. together they tossed the con-
tents of the tin into the gully.
after an hour or two of uncommunicative silence, the old woman decided that
the solar panels had absorbed enough sunlight to run the photocopier now and
she disappeared to rummage inside her cave. she emerged at last with a few
sheaves of paper and fed them through the machine.
she handed the copies to arthur.
this is, er, this your advice then, is it? said arthur, leafing through them
uncertainly.
no, said the old lady. its the story of my life. you see, the quality of
any advice anybody has to offer has to be judged against the quality of life

67

they actually lead. now, as you look through this document youll see that
ive underlined all the major decisions i ever made to make them stand out.
theyre all indexed and cross-referenced. see? all i can suggest is that if you
take decisions that are exactly opposite to the sort of decisions that ive taken,
then maybe you wont finish up at the end of your life... she paused, and
filled her lungs for a good shout, ... in a smelly old cave like this!
she grabbed up her table tennis bat, rolled up her sleeve, stomped off to her
pile of dead goat-like things, and started to set about the flies with vim and
vigour.

the last village arthur visited consisted entirely of extremely high poles.
they were so high that it wasnt possible to tell, from the ground, what was
on top of them, and arthur had to climb three before he found one that had
anything on top of it at all other than a platform covered with bird droppings.
not an easy task. you went up the poles by climbing on the short wooden pegs
that had been hammered into them in slowly ascending spirals. anybody who
was a less diligent tourist than arthur would have taken a couple of snapshots
and sloped right off to the nearest bar &amp; grill, where you also could buy
a range of particularly sweet and gooey chocolate cakes to eat in front of the
ascetics. but, largely as a result of this, most of the ascetics had gone now. in
fact they had mostly gone and set up lucrative therapy centres on some of the
more affluent worlds in the north west ripple of the galaxy, where the living
was easier by a factor of about seventeen million, and the chocolate was just
fabulous. most of the ascetics, it turned out, had not known about chocolate
before they took up asceticism. most of the clients who came to their therapy
centres knew about it all too well.
at the top of the third pole arthur stopped for a breather. he was very hot
and out of breath, since each pole was about fifty or sixty feet high. the
world seemed to swing vertiginously around him, but it didnt worry arthur
too much. he knew that, logically. he could not die until he had been to
stavromula beta 4, and had therefore managed to cultivate a merry attitude
towards extreme personal danger. he felt a little giddy perched fifty feet up in
the air on top of a pole, but he dealt with it by eating a sandwich. he was just
about to embark on reading the photocopied life history of the oracle, when
he was rather startled to hear a slight cough behind him.
he turned so abruptly that he dropped his sandwich, which turned down-
wards through the air and was rather small by the time it was stopped by the
ground.
about thirty feet behind arthur was another pole, and, alone amongst the
sparse forest of about three dozen poles, the top of it was occupied. it was

68

chapter 9.

occupied by an old man who, in turn, seemed to be occupied by profound
thoughts that were making him scowl.
excuse me, said arthur. the man ignored him. perhaps he couldnt hear
him. the breeze was moving about a bit. it was only by chance that arthur
had heard the slight cough.
hello? called arthur. hello!
the man at last glanced round at him. he seemed surprised to see him. arthur
couldnt tell if he was surprised and pleased to see him or just surprsised.
are you open? called arthur.
the man frowned in incomprehension. arthur couldnt tell if he couldnt un-
derstand or couldnt hear.



ill pop over, called arthur. dont go away.
he clambered off the small platform and climbed quickly down the spiralling
pegs, arriving at the bottom quite dizzy.
he started to make his way over to the pole on which the old man was sitting,
and then suddenly realised that he had disoriented himself on the way down
and didnt know for certain which one it was.
he looked around for landmarks and worked out which was the right one.
he climbed it. it wasnt.
damn, he said. excuse me! he called out to the old man again, who was
now straight in front of him and forty feet away. got lost. be with you in a
minute. down he went again, getting very hot and bothered.
when he arrived, panting and sweating, at the top of the pole that he knew
for certain was the right one he realised that the man was, somehow or other,
mucking him about.
what do you want? shouted the old man crossly at him. he was now sitting
on top of the pole that arthur recognised was the one that he had been on
himself when eating his sandwich.
how did you get over there? called arthur in bewilder- ment.
you think im going to tell you just like that what it took me forty springs,
summers and autumns of sitting on top of a pole to work out?
what about winter?
what about winter?
dont you sit on the pole in the winter?
just because i sit up a pole for most of my life, said the man, doesnt mean
im an idiot. i go south in the winter. got a beach house. sit on the chimney
stack.
do you have any advice for a traveller?
yes. get a beach house.70

chapter 10.

i see.
the man stared out over the hot, dry scrubby landscape. from here arthur
could just see the old woman, a tiny speck in the distance, dancing up and
down swatting flies.
you see her? called the old man, suddenly.
yes, said arthur. i consulted her in fact.
fat lot she knows. i got the beach house because she turned it down. what
advice did she give you?
do exactly the opposite of everything shes done.
in other words, get a beach house.
i suppose so, said arthur. well, maybe ill get one.
hmmm.
the horizon was swimming in a fetid heat haze.
any other advice? asked arthur. other than to do with real estate?
a beach house isnt just real estate. its a state of mind, said the man. he
turned and looked at arthur.
oddly, the mans face was now only a couple of feet away. he seemed in one
way to be a perfectly normal shape, but his body was sitting cross-legged on
a pole forty feet away while his face was only two feet from arthurs. without
moving his head, and without seeming to do anything odd at all, he stood up
and stepped on to the top of another pole. either it was just the heat, thought
arthur, or space was a different shape for him.
a beach house, he said, doesnt even have to be on the beach. though the
best ones are. we all like to congregate, he went on, at boundary condi-
tions.
really? said arthur.
where land meets water. where earth meets air. where body meets mind.
where space meets time. we like to be on one side, and look at the other.
arthur got terribly excited. this was exactly the sort of thing hed been
promised in the brochure. here was a man who seemed to be moving through
some kind of escher space saying really profound things about all sorts of stuff.
it was unnerving though. the man was now stepping from pole to ground,
from ground to pole, from pole to pole, from pole to horizon and back: he was
making complete nonsense of arthurs spatial universe. please stop! arthur
said, suddenly.
cant take it, huh? said the man. without the slightest movement he was
now back, sitting cross-legged, on top of the pole forty feet in front of arthur.
you come to me for advice, but you cant cope with anything you dont recog-
nise. hmmm. so well have to tell you something you already know but make
it sound like news, eh? well, business as usual i suppose. he sighed and

71

squinted mournfully into the distance.
where you from, boy? he then asked. arthur decided to be clever. he was
fed up with being mistaken for a complete idiot by everyone he ever met. tell
you what, he said. youre a seer. why dont you tell me?
the old man sighed again. i was just, he said, passing his hand round be-
hind his head, making conversation. when he brought his hand round to the
front again, he had a globe of the earth spinning on his up-pointed forefinger.
it was unmistakable. he put it away again. arthur was stunned.
how did you -
i cant tell you.
why not? ive come all this way. you cannot see what i see because you
see what you see. you cannot know what i know because you know what you
know. what i see and what i know cannot be added to what you see and what
you know because they are not of the same kind. neither can it replace what
you see and what you know, because that would be to replace you yourself.
hang on, can i write this down? said arthur, excitedly fumbling in his
pocket for a pencil.
you can pick up a copy at the spaceport, said the old man . theyve got
racks of the stuff.
oh, said arthur, disappointed. well, isnt there anything thats perhaps a
bit more specific to me?
everything you see or hear or experience in any way at all is specific to you.
you create a universe by perceiving it, so everything in the universe you per-
ceive is specific to you.
arthur looked at him doubtfully. can i get that at the spaceport, too? he
said.
check it out, said the old man.
it says in the brochure, said arthur, pulling it out of his pocket and looking
at it again, that i can have a special prayer, individually tailored to me and
my special needs.
oh, all right, said the old man. heres a prayer for you. got a pencil?
yes, said arthur.
it goes like this. lets see now: protect me from knowing what i dont
need to know. protect me from even knowing that there are things to know
that i dont know. protect me from knowing that i decided not to know about
the things that i decided not to know about. amen. thats it. its what
you pray silently inside yourself anyway, so you may as well have it out in the
open.
hmmm, said arthur. well, thank you -
theres another prayer that goes with it thats very impor- tant, continued

72

chapter 10.

the old man, so youd better jot this down, too.
ok.
it goes, lord, lord, lord... its best to put that bit in, just in case. you
can never be too sure lord, lord, lord. protect me from the consequences of
the above prayer. amen... and thats it. most of the trouble people get into
in life comes from missing out that last part.
ever heard of a place called stavromula beta? asked arthur.
no.
well, thank you for your help, said arthur.
dont mention it, said the man on the pole, and vanished.



ford hurled himself at the door of the editor-in-chiefs office, tucked himself
into a tight ball as the frame splintered and gave way once again, rolled rapidly
across the floor to where the smart grey crushed leather sofa was and set up
his strategic operational base behind it.
that, at least, was the plan.
unfortunately the smart grey crushed leather sofa wasnt there.
why, thought ford, as he twisted himself round in mid-air, lurched, dived and
scuttled for cover behind harls desk, did people have this stupid obsession
with rearranging their office furniture every five minutes?
why, for instance, replace a perfectly serviceable if rather muted grey crushed
leather sofa with what appeared to be a small tank?
and who was the big guy with the mobile rocket launcher on his shoulder?
someone from head office? couldnt be. this was head office. at least it was
the head office of the guide. where these infinidim enterprises guys came
from zarquon knew. nowhere very sunny, judging from the slug-like colour
and texture of their skins. this was all wrong, thought ford. people connected
with the guide should come from sunny places.
there were several of them, in fact, and all of them seemed to be more heavily
armed and armoured than you normally expected corporate executives to be,
even in todays rough and tumble business world.
he was making a lot of assumptions here, of course. he was assuming that the
big, bull-necked, slug-like guys were in some way connected with infinidim
enterprises, but it was a reasonable assumption and he felt happy about it
because they had logos on their armour-plating which said infinidim enter-
prises on them. he had a nagging suspicion that this was not a business
meeting, though. he also had a nagging feeling that these slug-like creatures
were familiar to him in some way. familiar, but in an unfamiliar guise.
well, he had been in the room for a good two and a half seconds now, and74

chapter 11.

thought that it was probably about time to start doing something construc-
tive. he could take a hostage. that would be good.
vann harl was in his swivel chair, looking alarmed, pale and shaken. had
probably had some bad news as well as a nasty bang to the back of his head.
ford leapt to his feet and made a running grab for him.
under the pretext of getting him into a good solid double underpinned elbow-
lock, ford managed surreptitiously to slip the ident-i-eeze back into harls
inner pocket.
bingo!
hed done what he came to do. now he just had to talk his way out of here.
ok, he said. i... he paused.
the big guy with the rocket launcher was turning towards ford prefect and
pointing it at him, which ford couldnt help feeling was wildly irresponsible
behaviour.
i... he started again, and then on a sudden impulse decided to duck.
there was a deafening roar as flames leapt from the back of the rocket launcher
and a rocket leapt from its front.
the rocket hurtled past ford and hit the large plate-glass window, which
billowed outwards in a shower of a million shards under the force of the ex-
plosion. huge shock waves of noise and air pressure reverberated around the
room, sweeping a couple of chairs, a filing cabinet and colin the security robot
out of the window.
ah! so theyre not totally rocket-proof after all, thought ford prefect to him-
self. someone should have a word with somebody about that. he disentangled
himself from harl and tried to work out which way to run.
he was surrounded.
the big guy with the rocket launcher was moving it up into position for an-
other shot. ford was completely at a loss for what to do next.
look, he said in a stern voice. but he wasnt certain how far saying things
like look in a stern voice was necessarily going to get him, and time was
not on his side. what the hell, he thought, youre only young once, and threw
himself out of the window. that would at least keep the element of surprise
on his side.



the first thing arthur dent had to do, he realised resignedly, was to get him-
self a life. this meant he had to find a planet he could have one on. it had
to be a planet he could breathe on, where he could stand up and sit down
without experiencing gravitational discomfort. it had to be somewhere where
the acid levels were low and the plants didnt actually attack you.
i hate to be anthropic about this, he said to the strange thing behind the
desk at the resettlement advice centre on pintleton alpha, but id quite like
to live somewhere where the people look vaguely like me as well. you know.
sort of human.
the strange thing behind the desk waved some of its stranger bits around and
seemed rather taken aback by this. it oozed and glopped off its seat, thrashed
its way slowly across the floor, ingested the old metal filing cabinet and then,
with a great belch, excreted the appropriate drawer. it popped out a couple of
glistening tentacles from its ear, removed some files from the drawer, sucked
the drawer back in and vomited up the cabinet again. it thrashed its way back
across the floor, slimed its way back up on to the seat and slapped the files
on the table.
see anything you fancy? it asked.
arthur looked nervously through some grubby and damp pieces of paper. he
was definitely in some backwater part of the galaxy here, and somewhere
off to the left as far as the universe he knew and recognised was concerned.
in the space where his own home should have been there was a rotten hick
planet, drowned with rain and inhabited by thugs and boghogs. even the
hitch hikers guide to the galaxy seemed to work only fitfully here, which
was why he was reduced to making these sorts of enquiries in these sorts of
places. one place he always asked after was stavromula beta, but no one had
ever heard of such a planet.
the available worlds looked pretty grim. they had little to offer him because76

chapter 12.

he had little to offer them. he had been extremely chastened to realise that
although he originally came from a world which had cars and computers and
ballet and armagnac he didnt, by himself, know how any of it worked. he
couldnt do it. left to his own devices he couldnt build a toaster. he could
just about make a sandwich and that was it. there was not a lot of demand
for his services.
arthurs heart sank. this surprised him, because he thought it was already
about as low as it could possibly be. he closed his eyes for a moment. he so
much wanted to be home. he so much wanted his own home world, the actual
earth he had grown up on, not to have been demolished. he so much wanted
none of this to have happened. he so much wanted that when he opened his
eyes again he would be standing on the doorstep of his little cottage in the
west country of england, that the sun would be shining over the green hills,
the post van would be going up the lane, the daffodils would be blooming in
his garden, and in the distance the pub would be opening for lunch. he so
much wanted to take the newspaper down to the pub and read it over a pint
of bitter. he so much wanted to do the crossword. he so much wanted to be
able to get completely stuck on 17 across.
he opened his eyes.
the strange thing was pulsating irritably at him, tapping some kind of pseu-
dopodia on the desk.
arthur shook his head and looked at the next sheet of paper.
grim, he thought. and the next.
very grim. and the next.
oh... now that looked better.
it was a world called bartledan. it had oxygen. it had green hills. it even, it
seemed, had a renowned literary culture. but the thing that most aroused his
interest was a photograph of a small bunch of bartledanian people, standing
around in a village square, smiling pleasantly at the camera.
ah, he said, and held the picture up to the strange thing behind the desk.
its eyes squirmed out on stalks and roiled up and down the piece of paper,
leaving a glistening trail of slime all over it.
yes, it said with distaste. they do look exactly like you.

arthur moved to bartledan and, using some money he had made by selling
some toenail clippings and spit to a dna bank, he bought himself a room in
the village featured in the picture. it was pleasant there. the air was balmy.
the people looked like him and seemed not to mind him being there. they
didnt attack him with anything. he bought some clothes and a cupboard to
put them in.

77

he had got himself a life. now he had to find a purpose in it.
at first he tried to sit and read. but the literature of bartledan, famed though
it was throughout this sector of the galaxy for its subtlety and grace, didnt
seem to be able to sustain his interest. the problem was that it wasnt actu-
ally about human beings after all. it wasnt about what human beings wanted.
the people of bartledan were remarkably like human beings to look at, but
when you said good evening to one, he would tend to look around with a
slight sense of surprise, sniff the air and say that, yes, he supposed that it
probably was a goodish evening now that arthur came to mention it.
no, what i meant was to wish you a good evening, arthur would say, or
rather, used to say. he soon learned to avoid these conversations. i mean
that i hope you have a good evening, he would add.
more puzzlement.
wish? the bartledanian would say at last, in polite bafflement.
er, yes, arthur would then have said. im just expressing the hope that...
hope?
yes.
what is hope?
good question, thought arthur to himself, and retreated back to his room to
think about things.
on the one hand he could only recognise and respect what he learnt about the
bartledanian view of the universe, which was that the universe was what the
universe was, take it or leave it. on the other hand he could not help but feel
that not to desire anything, not ever to. wish or to hope, was just not natural.
natural. there was a tricky word.
he had long ago realised that a lot of things that he had thought of as natural,
like buying people presents at christmas, stopping at red lights or falling at a
rate of 32 feet/second/second, were just the habits of his own world and didnt
necessarily work the same way anywhere else; but not to wish - that really
couldnt be natural, could it? that would be like not breathing.
breathing was another thing that the bartledanians didnt do, despite all the
oxygen in the atmosphere. they just stood there. occasionally they ran
around and played netball and stuff (without ever wishing to win though, of
course - they would just play, and whoever won, won), but they never actu-
ally breathed. it was, for some reason, unnecessary. arthur quickly learned
that playing netball with them was just too spooky. though they looked like
humans, and even moved and sounded like humans, they didnt breathe and
they didnt wish for things.
breathing and wishing for things, on the other hand, was just about all that
arthur seemed to do all day. sometimes he would wish for things so much that

78

chapter 12.

his breathing would get quite agitated, and he would have to go and lie down
for a bit. on his own. in his small room. so far from the world which had
given birth to him that his brain could not even process the sort of numbers
involved without just going limp.
he preferred not to think about it. he preferred just to sit and read - or at least
he would prefer it if there was anything worth reading. but nobody in bar-
tledanian stories ever wanted anything. not even a glass of water. certainly,
they would fetch one if they were thirsty, but if there wasnt one available,
they would think no more about it. he had just read an entire book in which
the main character had, over the course of a week, done some work in his
garden, played a great deal of netball, helped mend a road, fathered a child
on his wife and then unexpectedly died of thirst just before the last chapter.
in exasperation arthur had combed his way back through the book and in
the end had found a passing reference to some problem with the plumbing in
. and that was it. so the guy dies. it just happens.
it wasnt even the climax of the book, because there wasnt one. the char-
acter died about a third of the way through the penultimate chapter of the
book, and the rest of it was just more stuff about road-mending. the book
just finished dead at the one hundred thousandth word, because that was how
long books were on bartledan.
arthur threw the book across the room, sold the room and left. he started to
travel with wild abandon, trading in more and more spit, toenails, fingernails,
blood, hair, anything that anybody wanted, for tickets. for semen, he discov-
ered, he could travel first class. he settled nowhere, but only existed in the
hermetic, twilight world of the cabins of hyperspatial starships, eating, drink-
ing, sleeping, watching movies, only stopping at spaceports to donate more
dna and catch the next long-haul ship out. he waited and waited for another
accident to happen.
the trouble with trying to make the right accident happen is that it wont.
that is not what accident means. the acci- dent that eventually occurred
was not what he had planned at all. the ship he was on blipped in hyperspace,
flickered horribly between ninety-seven different points in the galaxy simul-
taneously, caught the unexpected gravitational pull of an uncharted planet
in one of them, became ensnared in its outer atmosphere and began to fall,
screaming and tearing, into it.
the ships systems protested all the way down that everything was perfectly
normal and under control, but when it went into a final hectic spin, ripped
wildly through half a mile of trees and finally exploded into a seething ball of
flame it became clear that this was not the case.
fire engulfed the forest, boiled into the night, then neatly put itself out, as all

79

unscheduled fires over a certain size are now required to do by law. for a short
while afterwards, other small fires flared up here and there as odd pieces of
scattered debris exploded quietly in their own time. then they too died away.
arthur dent, because of the sheer boredom of endless inter- stellar flight, was
the only one on board who had actually familiarised himself with the ships
safety procedures in case of an unscheduled landing, and was therefore the sole
survivor. he lay dazed, broken and bleeding in a sort of fluffy pink plastic
cocoon with have a nice day printed in over three thousand different lan-
guages all over it.
black, roaring silences swam sickeningly through his shattered mind. he knew
with a kind of resigned certainty that he would survive, because he had not
yet been to stavromula beta.
after what seemed an eternity of pain and darkness, he became aware of quiet
shapes moving around him.

80

chapter 12.



ford tumbled through the open air in a cloud of glass splinters and chair parts.
again, he hadnt really thought things through, really, and was just playing
it by ear, buying time. at times of major crisis he found it was often quite
helpful to have his life flash before his eyes. it gave him a chance to reflect on
things, see things in some sort of perspective, and it sometimes furnished him
with a vital clue as to what to do next.
there was the ground rushing up to meet him at 30 feet per second per second,
but he would, he thought, deal with that problem when he got to it. first
things first.
ah, here it came. his childhood. hum drum stuff, hed been through it all be-
fore. images flashed by. boring times on betelgeuse five. zaphod beeblebrox
as a kid. yes he knew all that. he wished he had some kind of fast forward
in his brain. his seventh birthday party, being given his first towel. come on,
come on.
he was twisting and turning downwards, the outside air at this height a cold
shock to his lungs. trying not to inhale glass.
early voyages to other planets. oh for zarks sake, this was like some sort of
bloody travelogue documentary before the main feature. first beginning to
work for the guide.
ah!
those were the days. they worked out of a hut on the bwenelli atoll on
fanalla before the riktanarqals and the danqueds vertled it. half a dozen
guys, some towels, a handful of highly sophisticated digital devices, and most
importantly a lot of dreams. no. most importantly a lot of fanallan rum. to
be completely accurate, that ol janx spirit was the absolute most important
thing, then the fanallan rum, and also some of the beaches on the atoll where
the local girls would hang out, but the dreams were important as well. what-
ever happened to those?82

chapter 13.

he couldnt quite remember what the dreams were in fact, but they had seemed
immensely important at the time. they had certainly not involved this huge
towering office block he was now falling down the side of. all of that had come
when some of the original team had started to settle down and get greedy,
while he and others had stayed out in the field, researching and hitch hiking,
and gradually becoming more and more isolated from the corporate nightmare
the guide had inexorably turned into, and the architectural monstrosity it
had come to occupy. where were the dreams in that? he thought of all the
corporate lawyers who occupied half of the building, all the operatives who
occupied the lower levels, and all the sub-editors and their secretaries and their
secretaries lawyers and their secretaries lawyers secretaries, and worst of
all the accountants and the marketing department.
he had half a mind just to keep on falling. two fingers to the lot of them.
he was just passing the seventeenth floor now, where the marketing depart-
ment hung out. load of tosspots all arguing about what colour the guide
should be and exercising their infinitely infallible skills of being wise after the
event. if any of them had chosen to look out of the window at that moment
they would have been startled by the sight of ford prefect dropping past them
to his certain death and flicking v-signs at them.
sixteenth floor. sub-editors. bastards. what about all that copy of his theyd
cut? fifteen years of research hed filed from one planet alone and theyd cut
it to two words. mostly harmless. v-signs to them as well.
fifteenth floor. logistical administration, whatever that was about. they all
had big cars. that, he thought, was what that was about.
fourteenth floor. personnel. he had a very shrewd suspicion that it was they
who had engineered his fifteen-year exile while the guide metamorphosed into
the corporate monolith (or rather, duolith - mustnt forget the lawyers) it had
become.
thirteenth floor. research and development.
hang about.
thirteenth floor.
he was having to think rather fast at the moment because the situation was
becoming a little urgent.
he suddenly remembered the floor display panel in the eleva- tor. it hadnt
had a thirteenth floor. hed thought no more about it because, having spent
fifteen years on the rather backward planet earth where they were super-
stitious about the number thirteen, he was used to being in buildings that
numbered their floors without it. no reason for that here, though.
the windows of the thirteenth floor, he could not help noticing as he flashed
swiftly by them, were darkened.

83

what was going on in there? he started to remember all the stuff that harl
had been talking about. one, new, multi- dimensional guide spread across
an infinite number of universes.
it had sounded, the way harl had put it,
like wild meaninglessness dreamed up by the marketing department with the
backing of the accountants. if it was any more real than that then it was a
very weird and dangerous idea. was it real? what was going on behind the
darkened windows of the sealed-off thirteenth floor?
ford felt a rising sense of curiosity, and then a rising sense of panic. that was
the complete list of rising feelings he had. in every other respect he was falling
very rapidly. he really ought to turn his mind to wondering how he was going
to get out of this situation alive.
he glanced down. a hundred feet or so below him people were milling around,
some of them beginning to look up expect- antly. clearing a space for him.
even temporarily calling off the wonderful and completely fatuous hunt for
wockets.
he would hate to disappoint them, but about two feet below him, he hadnt
realised before, was colin. colin had obviously been happily dancing atten-
dance and waiting for him to decide what he wanted to do.
colin! ford bawled.
colin didnt respond. ford went cold. then he suddenly realised that he
hadnt told colin his name was colin.
come up here! ford bawled.
colin bobbed up beside him. colin was enjoying the ride down immensely and
hoped that ford was, too.
colins world went unexpectedly dark as fords towel suddenly enveloped him.
colin immediately felt himself get much, much heavier. he was thrilled and
delighted by the challenge that ford had presented him with. just not sure if
he could handle it, that was all.
the towel was slung over colin. ford was hanging from the towel, gripping to
its seams. other hitch hikers had seen fit to modify their towels in exotic ways,
weaving all kinds of esoteric tools and utilities and even computer equipment
into their fabric. ford was a purist. he liked to keep things simple. he carried
a regular towel from a regular domestic soft furnishings shop. it even had a
kind of blue and pink floral pattern despite his repeated attempts to bleach
and stone wash it. it had a couple of pieces of wire threaded into it, a bit of
flexible writing stick, and also some nutrients soaked into one of the corners of
the fabric so he could suck it in an emergency, but otherwise it was a simple
towel you could dry your face on.
the only actual modification he had been persuaded by a friend to make to it
was to reinforce the seams.

84

chapter 13.

ford gripped the seams like a maniac.
they were still descending, but the rate had slowed.
up, colin! he shouted.
nothing.
your name, shouted ford, is colin. so when i shout up, colin! i want
you, colin, to go up. ok? up, colin!
nothing. or rather a sort of muffled groaning sound from colin. ford was
very anxious. they were descending very slow- ly now, but ford was very anx-
ious about the sort of people he could see assembling on the ground beneath
him. friendly, local, wocket-hunting types were dispersing, and thick, heavy,
bull-necked, slug-like creatures with rocket launchers were, it seemed, sliding
out of what was usually called thin air. thin air, as all experienced galactic
travellers well know, is, in fact, extremely thick with multi-dimensional com-
plexities.
up, bellowed ford again. up! colin, go up!
colin was straining and groaning. they were now more or less stationary in
the air. ford felt as if his fingers were breaking.
up!
they stayed put.
up, up, up!
a slug was preparing to launch a rocket at him. ford couldnt believe it. he
was hanging from a towel in mid-air and a slug was preparing to fire rockets
at him. he was running out of anything he could think of doing and was be-
ginning to get seriously alarmed.
this was the sort of predicament that he usually relied on having the guide
available for to give advice, however infuriating or glib, but this was not a
moment for reaching into his pocket. and the guide seemed to be no longer
a friend and ally but was now itself a source of danger. these were the guide
offices he was hanging outside, for zarks sake, in danger of his life from the
people who now appeared to own the thing. what had become of all the
dreams he vaguely remembered having on the bwenelli atoll? they should
have let it all be. they should have stayed there. stayed on the beach. loved
good women. lived on fish. he should have known it was all wrong the
moment they started hanging grand pianos over the sea-monster pool in the
atrium. he began to feel thoroughly wasted and miserable. his fingers were
on fire with clenched pain. and his ankle was still hurting.
oh thank you, ankle, he thought to himself bitterly. thank you for bringing
up your problems at this time. i expect youd like a nice warm footbath to
make you feel better, wouldnt you? or at least youd like me to...
he had an idea.

85

the armoured slug had hoisted the rocket launcher up on to its shoulder. the
rocket was presumably designed to hit anything in its path that moved.
ford tried not to sweat because he could feel his grip on the seams of his towel
slipping.
with the toe of his good foot he nudged and prised at the heel of the shoe on
his hurting foot.
go up, damn you! ford muttered hopelessly to colin, who was cheerily
straining away but unable to rise. ford worked away at the heel of his shoe.
he was trying to judge the timing, but there was no point. just go for it. he
only had one shot and that was it. he had now eased the back of his shoe
down off his heel. his twisted ankle felt a little better. well that was good,
wasnt it?
with his other foot he kicked at the heel of the shoe. it slipped off his foot
and fell through the air. about half a second later a rocket erupted up from
the muzzle of its launcher, encountered the shoe falling through its path, went
straight for it, hit it, and exploded with a great sense of satisfaction and
achievement.
this happened about fifteen feet from the ground.
the main force of the explosion was directed downwards. where, a second
earlier, there had been a squad of infinidim enterprises executives with a
rocket launcher standing on an elegant terraced plaza paved with large slabs
of lustrous stone cut from the ancient alabastrum quarries of zentalquabula
there was now, instead, a bit of a pit with nasty bits in it.
a great wump of hot air welled up from the explosion throwing ford and colin
violently up into the sky. ford fought desperately and blindly to hold on and
failed. he turned helplessly upwards through the sky, reached the peak of a
parabola, paused and then started to fall again. he fell and fell and fell and
suddenly winded himself badly on colin, who was still rising.
he clasped himself desperately on to the small spherical robot. colin slewed
wildly through the air towards the tower of the guide offices, trying delight-
edly to control himself and slow down.
the world span sickeningly round fords head as they span and twisted round
each other and then, equally sickeningly, everything suddenly stopped.
ford found himself deposited dizzily on a window ledge.
his towel fell past and he grabbed at it and caught it.
colin bobbed in the air inches away from him.
ford looked around himself in a bruised, bleeding and breath- less daze. the
ledge was only about a foot wide and he was perched precariously on it, thir-
teen stories up.
thirteen.

86

chapter 13.

he knew they were thirteen stories up because the windows were dark. he was
bitterly upset. he had bought those shoes for some absurd price in a store on
the lower east side in new york. he had, as a result, written an entire essay
on the joys of great footwear, all of which had been jettisoned in the mostly
harmless debacle. damn everything.
and now one of the shoes was gone. he threw his head back and stared at the
sky.
it wouldnt be such a grim tragedy if the planet in question hadnt been de-
molished, which meant that he wouldnt even be able to get another pair.
yes, given the infinite sideways extension of probability there was, of course,
an almost infinite multiplicity of planets earth, but, when you came down to
it, a major pair of shoes wasnt something you could just replace by mucking
about in multi- dimensional space/time.
he sighed.
oh well, hed better make the best of it. at least it had saved his life. for the
time being.
he was perched on a foot-wide ledge thirteen stories up the side of a building
and he wasnt at all sure that that was worth a good shoe.
he stared in woozily through the darkened glass.
it was as dark and silent as the tomb.
no. that was a ridiculous thing to think. hed been to some great parties in
tombs.
could he detect some movement? he wasnt quite sure. it seemed that he
could see some kind of weird, flapping shad- ow. perhaps it was just blood
dribbling over his eyelashes . he wiped it away. boy, hed love to have a
farm somewhere, keep some sheep. he peered into the window again, trying
to make out what the shape was, but he had the feeling, so common in todays
universe, that he was looking into some kind of optical illusion and that his
eyes were just playing silly buggers with him.
was there a bird of some kind in there? was that what they had hidden away
up here on a concealed floor behind darkened, rocket-proof glass? someones
aviary? there was certainly something flapping about in there, but it seemed
like not so much a bird, more a kind of bird-shaped hole in space.
he closed his eyes, which hed been wanting to do for a bit anyway. he won-
dered what the hell to do next. jump? climb? he didnt think there was going
to be any way of breaking in. ok, the supposedly rocket-proof glass hadnt
stood up, when it came to it, to an actual rocket, but then that had been a
rocket that had been fired at very short range from inside, which probably
wasnt what the engineers who designed it had had in mind. it didnt mean he
was going to be able to break the window here by wrapping his fist in his towel

87

and punching. what the hell, he tried it anyway and hurt his fist. it was just
as well he couldnt get a good swing from where he was sitting or he might
have hurt it quite badly. the building had been sturdily reinforced when it
was completely rebuilt after the frogstar attack, and was probably the most
heavily armoured publishing company in the business, but there was always,
he thought, some weakness in any system designed by a corporate committee.
he had already found one of them. the engineers who designed the windows
had not expected them to be hit by a rocket from short range from the inside,
so the window had failed.
so, what would the engineers not be expecting someone sitting on the ledge
outside the window to do?
he wracked his brains for a moment or so before he got it.
the thing they wouldnt be expecting him to do was to be there in the first
place. only an absolute idiot would be sitting where he was, so he was winning
already. a common mistake that people make when trying to design some-
thing completely foolproof is to underestimate the ingenuity of complete fools.
he pulled his newly acquired credit card from his pocket, slid it into a crack
where the window met its surrounding frame, and did something a rocket would
not have been able to do. he wiggled it around a bit. he felt a catch slip. he
slid the window open and almost fell backwards off the ledge laughing, giving
thanks as he did so for the great ventilation and telephone riots of srdt 3454.

the great ventilation and telephone riots of srdt 3454 had started off as
just a lot of hot air. hot air was, of course, the problem that ventilation was
supposed to solve and generally it had solved the problem reasonably well up
to the point when someone invented air-conditioning, which solved the prob-
lem far more throbbingly.
and that was all well and good provided you could stand the noise and the
dribbling until someone else came up with something even sexier and smarter
than air-conditioning which was called in-building climate control.
now this was quite something.
the major differences from just ordinary air-conditioning were that it was
thrillingly more expensive, involved a huge amount of sophisticated measuring
and regulating equipment which was far better at knowing, moment by mo-
ment, what kind of air people wanted to breathe than mere people did.
it also meant that, to be sure that mere people didnt muck up the sophisticated
calculations which the system was making on their behalf, all the windows in
the buildings were built sealed shut. this is true.
while the systems were being installed, a number of people who were going to
work in the buildings found themselves having conversations with breathe-o-

88

chapter 13.

smart systems fitters which went something like this:
but what if we want to have the windows open?
you wont want to have the windows open with new breathe- o-smart.
yes but supposing we just wanted to have them open for a little bit?
you wont want to have them open even for a little bit. the new breathe-o-
smart system will see to that.
hmmm.
enjoy breathe-o-smart!
ok, so what if the breathe-o-smart breaks down or goes wrong or some-
thing?
ah! one of the smartest features of the breathe-o-smart is that it cannot
possibly go wrong. so. no worries on that score. enjoy your breathing now,
and have a nice day.
(it was, of course, as a result of the great ventilation and telephone riots of
srdt 3454, that all mechanical or electri- cal or quantum-mechanical or hy-
draulic or even wind, steam or piston-driven devices, are now requited to have
a certain legend emblazoned on them somewhere. it doesnt matter how small
the object is, the designers of the object have got to find a way of squeezing
the legend in somewhere, because it is their attention which is being drawn to
it rather than necessarily that of the users.
the legend is this:
the major difference between a thing that might go wrong and a thing that
cannot possibly go wrong is that when a thing that cannot possibly go wrong
goes wrong it usually turns out to be impossible to get at or repair.)
major heat waves started to coincide, with almost magical precision, with ma-
jor failures of the breathe-o-smart systems. to begin with this merely caused
simmering resentment and only a few deaths from asphyxiation.
the real horror erupted on the day that three events happened simultaneously.
the first event was that breathe-o-smart inc. issued a statement to the effect
that best results were achieved by using their systems in temperate climates.
the second event was the breakdown of a breathe-o-smart system on a par-
ticularly hot and humid day with the resulting evacuation of many hundreds
of office staff into the street where they met the third event, which was a
rampaging mob of long- distance telephone operators who had got so twisted
with having to say, all day and every day, thank you for using bs&amp;s
to every single idiot who picked up a phone that they had finally taken to the
streets with trash cans, megaphones and rifles.
in the ensuing days of carnage every single window in the city, rocket-proof or
not, was smashed, usually to accompanying cries of get off the line, asshole!
i dont care what number you want, what extension youre calling from. go

89

and stick a firework up your bottom! yeeehaah! hoo hoo hoo! velooooom!
squawk! and a variety of other animal noises that they didnt get a chance
to practise in the normal line of their work.
as a result of this, all telephone operators were granted a constitutional right
to say use bs&amp;s and die! at least once an hour when answering the
phone and all office buildings were required to have windows that opened,
even if only a little bit.
another, unexpected result was a dramatic lowering of the suicide rate. all
sorts of stressed and rising executives who had been forced, during the dark
days of the breathe-o-smart tyr- anny, to jump in front of trains or stab them-
selves, could now just clamber out on to their own window ledges and leap off
at their leisure. what frequently happened, though, was that in the moment
or two they had to look around and gather their thoughts they would sud-
denly discover that all they had really needed was a breath of air and a fresh
perspective on things, and maybe also a farm on which they could keep a few
sheep.
another completely unlooked for result was that ford prefect, stranded thir-
teen stories up a heavily armoured building armed with nothing but a towel and
a credit card was nevertheless able to clamber through a supposedly rocket-
proof window to safety.
he closed the window neatly after him, having first allowed colin to follow
him through, and then started to look around for this bird thing.
the thing he realised about the windows was this: because they had been
converted into openable windows after they had first been designed to be im-
pregnable, they were, in fact, much less secure than if they had been designed
as openable windows in the first place.
hey ho, its a funny old life, he was just thinking to himself, when he suddenly
realised that the room he had gone to all this trouble to break into was not a
very interesting one.
he stopped in surprise.
where was the strange flapping shape? where was anything that was worth
all this palaver - the extraordinary veil of secrecy that seemed to lie over this
room and the equally extraordinary sequence of events that had seemed to
conspire to get him into it?
the room, like every other room in this building now, was done out in some
appallingly tasteful grey. there were a few charts and drawings on the wall.
most of them were meaningless to ford, but then he came across something
that was obviously a mock-up for a poster of some kind.
there was a kind of bird-like logo on it, and a slogan which said the hitch
hikers guide to the galaxy mk ii: the single most astounding thing of any

90

chapter 13.

kind ever. coming soon to a dimension near you. no more information than
that.
ford looked around again. then his attention was gradually drawn to colin,
the absurdly over-happy security robot, who was cowering in a corner of the
room gibbering with what seemed strangely like fear.
odd, thought ford. he looked around to see what it was that colin might
have been reacting to. then he saw something that he hadnt noticed before,
lying quietly on top of a work bench.
it was circular and black and about the size of a small side plate.
its top
and its bottom were smoothly convex so that it resembled a small lightweight
throwing discus.
its surfaces seemed to be completely smooth, unbroken and featureless.
it was doing nothing. then ford noticed that there was something written
on it. strange. there hadnt been anything written on it a moment ago and
now suddenly there was. there just didnt seem to have been any observable
transition between the two states.
all it said, in small, alarming letters was a single word:

panic

a moment ago there hadnt been any marks or cracks in its surface. now

there were. they were growing.
panic, the guide mk ii said. ford begin to do as he was told. he had just
remembered why the slug-like creatures looked familiar. their colour scheme
was a kind of corporate grey, but in all other respects they looked exactly like
vogons.



the ship dropped quietly to land on the edge of the wide clearing, a hundred
yards or so from the village.
it arrived suddenly and unexpectedly but with a minimum of fuss. one mo-
ment it was a perfectly ordinary late afternoon in the early autumn - the
leaves were just beginning to turn red and gold, the river was beginning to
swell again with the rains from the mountains in the north, the plumage of
the pikka birds was begin- ning to thicken in anticipation of the coming winter
frosts, any day now the perfectly normal beasts would start their thunderous
migration across the plains, and old thrashbarg was beginning to mutter to
himself as he hobbled his way around the village, a muttering which meant
that he was rehearsing and elaborating the stories that he would tell of the
past year once the evenings had drawn in and people had no choice but to
gather round the fire and listen to him and grumble and say that that wasnt
how they remembered it - and the next moment there was a spaceship sitting
there, gleaming in the warm autumn sun.
it hummed for a bit and then stopped.
it wasnt a big spaceship. if the villagers had been experts on spaceships they
would have known at once that it was a pretty nifty one, a small sleek hrundi
four-berth runabout with just about every optional extra in the brochure ex-
cept advanced vectoid stabilisis, which only wimps went for. you cant get
a good tight, sharp curve round a tri-lateral time axis with advanced vectoid
stabilisis. all right, its a bit safer, but it makes the handling go all soggy.
the villagers didnt know all that, of course. most of them here on the remote
planet of lamuella had never seen a spaceship, certainly not one that was all
in one piece, and as it shone warmly in the evening light it was just the most
extraordinary thing they had come across since the day kirp caught a fish
with a head at both ends.
everybody had fallen silent.92

chapter 14.

whereas a moment before two or three dozen people had been wandering
about, chattering, chopping wood, carrying water, teasing the pikka birds, or
just amiably trying to stay out of old thrashbargs way, suddenly all activity
died away and everybody turned to look at the strange object in amazement.
or, not quite everybody. the pikka birds tended to be amazed by completely
different things. a perfectly ordinary leaf lying unexpectedly on a stone would
cause them to skitter off in par- oxysms of confusion; sunrise took them com-
pletely by surprise every morning, but the arrival of an alien craft from another
world simply failed to engage any part of their attention. they continued to
kar and rit and huk as they pecked for seeds on the ground; the river continued
with its quiet, spacious burbling.
also, the noise of loud and tuneless singing from the last hut on the left con-
tinued unabated.
suddenly, with a slight click and a hum, a door folded itself outwards and
downwards from the spaceship. then, for a minute or two, nothing further
seemed to happen, other than the loud singing from the last hut on the left,
and the thing just sat there.
some of the villagers, particularly the boys, began to edge forward a little bit
to have a closer look. old thrashbarg tried to shoo them back. this was
exactly the sort of thing that old thrashbarg didnt like to have happening.
he hadnt foretold it, not even slightly, and even though he would be able to
wrestle the whole thing into his continuing story somehow or other, it really
was all getting a bit much to deal with.
he strode forward, pushed the boys back, and raised his arms and his ancient
knobbly staff into the air. the long warm light of the evening sun caught him
nicely. he prepared to welcome whatever gods these were as if he had been
expecting them all along.
still nothing happened.
gradually it became clear that there was some kind of argument going on
inside the craft. time went by and old thrashbargs arms were beginning to
ache.
suddenly the ramp folded itself back up again. that made it easy for thrash-
barg. they were demons and he had repulsed them. the reason he hadnt
foretold it was that prudence and modesty forbade.
almost immediately a different ramp folded itself out on the other side of the
craft from where thrashbarg was standing, and two figures at last emerged
on it, still arguing with each other and ignoring everybody, even thrashbarg,
whom they wouldnt even have noticed from where they were standing.
old thrashbarg chewed angrily on his beard.
to continue to stand there with his arms upraised? to kneel with his head

93

bowed forward and his staff held out pointing at them? to fall backwards as
if overcome in some titanic inner struggle? perhaps just to go off to the woods
and live in a tree for a year without speaking to anyone?
he opted just to drop his arms smartly as if he had done what he meant to
do. they were really hurting so he didnt have much choice. he made a small,
secret sign he had just invented towards the ramp which had closed and then
made three and a half steps backwards, so he could at least get a good look at
whoever these people were and then decide what to do next.
the taller one was a very good looking woman wearing soft and crumply
clothes. old thrashbarg didnt know this, but they were made of rymplon
tm, a new synthetic fabric which was terrific for space travel because it looked
its absolute best when it was all creased and sweaty.
the shorter one was a girl. she was awkward and sullen looking, and was
wearing clothes which looked their absolute worst when they were all creased
and sweaty, and what was more she almost certainly knew it.
all eyes watched them, except for the pikka birds, which had their own things
to watch.
the woman stood and looked around her. she had a purposeful air about her.
there was obviously something in particular she wanted, but she didnt know
exactly where to find it. she glanced from face to face among the villagers as-
sembled curiously around her without apparently seeing what she was looking
for.
thrashbarg had no idea how to play this at all, and decided to resort to chant-
ing. he threw back his head and began to wail, but was instantly interrupted
by a fresh outbreak of song from the hut of the sandwich maker: the last one
on the left. the woman looked round sharply, and gradually a smile came over
her face. without so much as a glance at old thrashbarg she started to walk
towards the hut.

there is an art to the business of making sandwiches which it is given to
few ever to find the time to explore in depth. it is a simple task, but the oppor-
tunities for satisfaction are many and profound: choosing the right bread for
instance. the sandwich maker had spent many months in daily consultation
and experiment with grarp the baker and eventually they had between them
created a loaf of exactly the consistency that was dense enough to slice thinly
and neatly, while still being light, moist and having that fine nutty flavour
which best enhanced the savour of roast perfectly normal beast flesh.
there was also the geometry of the slice to be refined: the precise relationships
between the width and height of the slice and also its thickness which would
give the proper sense of bulk and weight to the finished sandwich: here again,

94

chapter 14.

lightness was a virtue, but so too were firmness, generosity and that promise
of succulence and savour that is the hallmark of a truly intense sandwich ex-
perience.
the proper tools, of course, were crucial, and many were the days that the
sandwich maker, when not engaged with the baker at his oven, would spend
with strinder the tool maker, weighing and balancing knives, taking them
to the forge and back again. suppleness, strength, keenness of edge, length
and balance were all enthusiastically debated, theories put forward, tested,
refined, and many was the evening when the sandwich maker and the tool
maker could be seen silhouetted against the light of the setting sun and the
tool makers forge making slow sweeping movements through the air trying
one knife after another, comparing the weight of this one with the balance of
another, the suppleness of a third and the handle binding of a fourth.
three knives altogether were required. first there was the knife for the slicing
of the bread: a firm, authoritative blade which imposed a clear and defining
will on a loaf. then there was the butter-spreading knife, which was a whippy
little number but still with a firm backbone to it. early versions had been a
little too whippy, but now the combination of flexibility with a core of strength
was exactly right to achieve the maximum smoothness and grace of spread.
the chief amongst the knives, of course, was the carving knife. this was the
knife that would not merely impose its will on the medium through which it
moved, as did the bread knife; it must work with it, be guided by the grain of
the meat, to achieve slices of the most exquisite consistency and translucency,
that would slide away in filmy folds from the main hunk of meat. the sand-
wich maker would then flip each sheet with a smooth flick of the wrist on to
the beautifully proportioned lower bread slice, trim it with four deft strokes
and then at last perform the magic that the children of the village so longed to
gather round and watch with rapt attention and wonder. with just four more
dexterous flips of the knife he would assemble the trimmings into a perfectly
fitting jigsaw of pieces on top of the primary slice. for every sandwich the
size and shape of the trimmings were different, but the sandwich maker would
always effortlessly and without hesitation assemble them into a pattern which
fitted perfectly. a second layer of meat and a second layer of trimmings, and
the main act of creation would be accomplished.
the sandwich maker would pass what he had made to his assistant who would
then add a few slices of newcumber and fladish and a touch of splagberry sauce,
and then apply the topmost layer of bread and cut the sandwich with a fourth
and altogether plainer knife. it was not that these were not also skilful oper-
ations, but they were lesser skills to be performed by a dedicated apprentice
who would one day, when the sandwich maker finally laid down his tools, take

95

over from him. it was an exalted position and that apprentice, drimple, was
the envy of his fellows. there were those in the village who were happy chop-
ping wood, those who were content carrying water, but to be the sandwich
maker was very heaven.
and so the sandwich maker sang as he worked.
he was using the last of the years salted meat. it was a little past its best
now, but still the rich savour of perfectly normal beast meat was something
unsurpassed in any of the sandwich makers previous experience. next week it
was anticipated that the perfectly normal beasts would appear again for their
regu- lar migration, whereupon the whole village would once again be plunged
into frenetic action: hunting the beasts, killing perhaps six, maybe even seven
dozen of the thousands that thundered past. then the beasts must be rapidly
butchered and cleaned, with most of the meat salted to keep it through the
winter months until the return migration in the spring, which would replenish
their supplies.
the very best of the meat would be roasted straight away for the feast that
marked the autumn passage. the celebrations would last for three days of
sheer exuberance, dancing and stories that old thrashbarg would tell of how
the hunt had gone, stories that he would have been busy sitting making up in
his hut while the rest of the village was out doing the actual hunting.
and then the very, very best of the meat would be saved from the feast and
delivered cold to the sandwich maker. and the sandwich maker would exer-
cise on it the skills that he had brought to them from the gods, and make the
exquisite sandwiches of the third season, of which the whole village would
partake before beginning, the next day, to prepare themselves for the rigours
of the coming winter.
today he was just making ordinary sandwiches, if such deli- cacies, so lovingly
crafted, could ever be called ordinary. today his assistant was away so the
sandwich maker was applying his own garnish, which he was happy to do. he
was happy with just about everything in fact.
he sliced, he sang. he flipped each slice of meat neatly on to a slice of bread,
trimmed it and assembled all the trimmings into their jigsaw. a little salad, a
little sauce, another slice of bread, another sandwich, another verse of yellow
submarine.
hello , arthur.
the sandwich maker almost sliced his thumb off.

the villagers had watched in consternation as the woman had marched
boldly to the hut of the sandwich maker. the sandwich maker had been sent
to them by almighty bob in a burning fiery chariot. this, at least, was what

96

chapter 14.

thrashbarg said, and thrashbarg was the authority on these things. so, at
least, thrashbarg claimed, and thrashbarg was... and so on and so on. it was
hardly worth arguing about.
a few villagers wondered why almighty bob would send his onlie begotten
sandwich maker in a burning fiery chariot rather than perhaps in one that
might have landed quietly without destroying half the forest, filling it with
ghosts and also injuring the sandwich maker quite badly. old thrashbarg
said that it was the ineffable will of bob, and when they asked him what
ineffable meant he said look it up.
this was a problem because old thrashbarg had the only dictionary and he
wouldnt let them borrow it. they asked him why not and he said that it
was not for them to know the will of almighty bob, and when they asked him
why not again he said because he said so. anyway, somebody sneaked into
old thrashbargs hut one day while he was out having a swim and looked up
ineffable. ineffable apparently meant unknowable, indescribable, unut-
terable, not to be known or spoken about. so that cleared that up.
at least they had got the sandwiches.
one day old thrashbarg said that almighty bob had decreed that he, thrash-
barg, was to have first pick of the sandwiches. the villagers asked him when
this had happened, exactly, and thrashbarg said it had happened yesterday,
when they werent looking. have faith, old thrashbarg said, or burn!
they let him have first pick of the sandwiches. it seemed easiest.

and now this woman had just arrived out of nowhere, and gone straight for
the sandwich makers hut. his fame had obviously spread, though it was hard
to know where to since, according to old thrashbarg, there wasnt anywhere
else. anyway, wherever it was she had come from, presumably somewhere
ineffable, she was here now and was in the sandwich makers hut. who was
she? and who was the strange girl who was hanging around outside the hut
moodily and kicking at stones and showing every sign of not wanting to be
there? it seemed odd that someone should come all the way from somewhere
ineffable in a chariot that was obviously a vast improvement on the burning
fiery one which had brought them the sandwich maker, if she didnt even want
to be here?
they all looked to thrashbarg, but he was on his knees mumbling and looking
very firmly up into the sky and not catching anybody elses eye until hed
thought of something.

trillian! said the sandwich maker, sucking his bleeding thumb. what...?

who...? when...? where...?

97

exactly the questions i was going to ask you, said trillian, looking around
arthurs hut. it was neatly laid out with his kitchen utensils. there were some
fairly basic cupboards and shelves, and a basic bed in the corner. a door at
the back of the room led to something trillian couldnt see because the door
was closed. nice, she said, but in an enquiring tone of voice. she couldnt
quite make out what the set-up was.
very nice, said arthur. wonderfully nice.
i dont know when ive ever
been anywhere nicer. im happy here. they like me, i make sandwiches for
them, and... er, well thats it really. they like me and i make sandwiches for
them.
sounds, er...
idyllic, said arthur, firmly. it is. it really is. i dont expect youd like
it very much, but for me its, well, its perfect. look, sit down, please, make
yourself comfortable. can i get you anything, er, a sandwich?
trillian picked up a sandwich and looked at it. she sniffed it carefully.
try it, said arthur, its good.
trillian took a nibble, then a bite and munched on it thought- fully.
it is good, she said, looking at it.
my lifes work, said arthur, trying to sound proud and hoping he didnt
sound like a complete idiot. he was used to being revered a bit, and was hav-
ing to go through some unexpected mental gear changes.
whats the meat in it? asked trillian.
ah yes, thats, um, thats perfectly normal beast.
its what?
perfectly normal beast. its a bit like a cow, or rather a bull. kind of like a
buffalo in fact. large, charging sort of animal.
so whats odd about it?
nothing, its perfectly normal.
i see.
its just a bit odd where it comes from.
tricia frowned, and stopped chewing.
where does it come from? she asked with her mouth full. she wasnt going
to swallow until she knew.
well its not just a matter of where it comes from, its also where it goes to.
its all right, its perfectly safe to swallow. ive eaten tons of it. its great.
very succulent. very tender. slightly sweet flavour with a long dark finish.
trillian still hadnt swallowed.
where, she said, does it come from, and where does it go to?
they come from a point just slightly to the east of the hondo mountains.
theyre the big ones behind us here, you must have seen them as you came in,

98

chapter 14.

and then they sweep in their thousands across the great anhondo plains and,
er, well thats it really. thats where they come from. thats where they go.
trillian frowned. there was something she wasnt quite getting about this.
i probably havent made it quite clear, said arthur. when i say they come
from a point to the east of the hondo moun- tains, i mean that thats where
they suddenly appear. then they sweep across the anhondo plains and, well,
vanish really. we have about six days to catch as many of them as we can
before they disappear. in the spring they do it again only the other way round,
you see.
reluctantly, trillian swallowed. it was either that or spit it out, and it did in
fact taste pretty good.
i see, she said, once she had reassured herself that she didnt seem to be
suffering any ill effects. and why are they called perfectly normal beasts?
well, i think because otherwise people might think it was a bit odd. i think
old thrashbarg called them that. he says that they come from where they
come from and they go to where they go to and that its bobs will and thats
all there is to it.
who...
just dont even ask.
well, you look well on it.
i feel well. you look well.
im well. im very well.
well, thats good.
yes.
good.
good.
nice of you to drop in.
thanks.
well, said arthur, casting around himself. astounding how hard it was to
think of anything to say to someone after all this time.
i expect youre wondering how i found you, said trillian.
yes! said arthur. i was wondering exactly that. how did you find me?
well, as you may or may not know, i now work for one of the big sub-etha
broadcasting networks that -
i did know that, said arthur, suddenly remembering. yes, youve done
very well. thats terrific. very exciting. well done. must be a lot of fun.
exhausting.
all that rushing around. i expect it must be, yes.
we have access to virtually every kind of information. i found your name on
the passenger list of the ship that crashed.

99

arthur was astonished.
you mean they knew about the crash?
well, of course they knew. you dont have a whole spaceliner disappear with-
out someone knowing about it.
but you mean, they knew where it had happened? they knew id survived?
yes.
but nobodys ever been to look or search or rescue. theres been absolutely
nothing.
well there wouldnt be. its a whole complicated insurance thing. they just
bury the whole thing. pretend it never happened. the insurance business is
completely screwy now. you know theyve reintroduced the death penalty for
insurance company directors?
really? said arthur. no i didnt. for what offence?
trillian frowned.
what do you mean, offence?
i see.
trillian gave arthur a long look, and then, in a new tone of voice, said, its
time for you to take responsibility, arthur.
arthur tried to understand this remark. he found it often took a moment or
so before he saw exactly what it was that people were driving at, so he let a
moment or two pass at a leisurely rate. life was so pleasant and relaxed these
days, there was time to let things sink in. he let it sink in.
he still didnt quite understand what she meant, though, so in the end he had
to say so.
trillian gave him a cool smile and then turned back to the door of the hut.
random? she called. come in. come and meet your father.

100

chapter 14.



as the guide folded itself back into a smooth, dark disk, ford realised some
pretty hectic stuff. or at least he tried to realise it, but it was too hectic to
take in all in one go. his head was hammering, his ankle was hurting, and
though he didnt like to be a wimp about his ankle, he always found that in-
tense multi- dimensional logic was something he understood best in the bath.
he needed time to think about this. time, a tall drink, and some kind of rich,
foamy oil.
he had to get out of here. he had to get the guide out of here. he didnt
think theyd make it together.
he glanced wildly round the room.
think, think, think. it had to be something simple and obvious. if he was
right in his nasty lurking suspicion that he was dealing with nasty, lurking
vogons, then the more simple and obvious the better.
suddenly he saw what he needed.
he wouldnt try to beat the system, he would just use it. the frightening thing
about the vogons was their absolute mindless determination to do whatever
mindless thing it was they were determined to do. there was never any point
in trying to appeal to their reason because they didnt have any. however, if
you kept your nerve you could sometimes exploit their blinkered, bludgeoning
insistence on being bludgeoning and blinkered. it wasnt merely that their left
hand didnt always know what their right hand was doing, so to speak; quite
often their right hand had a pretty hazy notion as well.
did he dare just post the thing to himself?
did he dare just put it in the system and let the vogons work out how to
get the thing to him while at the same time they were busy, as they probably
would be, tearing the building apart to find out where hed hidden it?
yes.
feverishly, he packed it. he wrapped it. he labelled it. with a moments102

chapter 15.

pause to wonder if he was really doing the right thing, he committed the pack-
age to the buildings internal mail chute.
colin, he said, turning to the little, hovering ball. i am going to abandon
you to your fate.
im so happy, said colin.
make the most of it, said ford. because what i want you to do is to nurse-
maid that package out of the building. theyll probably incinerate you when
they find you, and i wont be here to help. it will be very, very nasty for you,
and thats just too bad. got it?
i gurgle with pleasure, said colin.
go! said ford.
colin obediently dived down the mail chute in pursuit of his charge. now ford
had only himself to worry about, but that was still quite a substantial worry.
there were noises of heavy running footsteps outside the door, which he had
taken the precaution of locking and shifting a large filing cabinet in front of.
he was worried that everything had gone so smoothly. every- thing had fitted
terribly well. he had hurtled through the day with reckless abandon and yet
everything had worked out with uncanny neatness. except for his shoe. he
was bitter about his shoe. that was an account that was going to have to be
settled.
with a deafening roar the door exploded inwards. in the turmoil of smoke and
dust he could see large, slug-like creatures hurrying through.
so everything was going well was it? everything was working out as if the
most extraordinary luck was on his side? well, hed see about that.
in a spirit of scientific enquiry he hurled himself out of the window again.



the first month, getting to know each other, was a little difficult.
the second month, trying to come to terms with what theyd got to know
about each other in the first month, was much easier.
the third month, when the box arrived, was very tricky indeed.
at the beginning, it was a problem even trying to explain what a month was.
this had been a pleasantly simple matter for arthur, here on lamuella. the
days were just a little over twenty-five hours long, which basically meant an
extra hour in bed every single day and, of course, having regularly to reset his
watch, which arthur rather enjoyed doing.
he also felt at home with the number of suns and moons which lamuella had
- one of each - as opposed to some of the planets hed fetched up on from time
to time which had had ridiculous numbers of them.
the planet orbited its single sun every three hundred days, which was a good
number because it meant the year didnt drag by. the moon orbited lamuella
just over nine times a year, which meant that a month was a little over thirty
days, which was absolutely perfect because it gave you a little more time to
get things done in. it was not merely reassuringly like earth, it was actually
rather an improvement.
random, on the other hand, thought she was trapped in a recurring nightmare.
she would have crying fits and think the moon was out to get her. every night
it was there, and then, when it went, the sun came out and followed her. over
and over again.
trillian had warned arthur that random might have some difficulty in ad-
justing to a more regular lifestyle than she had been used to up till now, but
arthur hadnt been ready for actual howling at the moon.
he hadnt been ready for any of this of course.
his daughter?
his daughter? he and trillian had never even - had they? he was absolutely104

chapter 16.

convinced he would have remembered. what about zaphod?
not the same species, arthur, trillian had answered. when i decided i
wanted a child they ran all sorts of genetic tests on me and could find only one
match anywhere. it was only later that it dawned on me. i double checked
and i was right. they dont usually like to tell you, but i insisted.
you mean you went to a dna bank? arthur had asked, pop-eyed.
yes. but she wasnt quite as random as her name suggests, because, of course,
you were the only homo sapiens donor. i must say, though, it seems you were
quite a frequent flyer.
arthur had stared wide-eyed at the unhappy looking girl who was slouching
awkwardly in the door-frame looking at him.
but when... how long...?
you mean, what age is she?
yes.
the wrong one.
what do you mean?
i mean that i havent any idea.
what?
well, in my time line i think its about ten years since i had her, but shes
obviously quite a lot older than that. i spend my life going backwards and
forwards in time, you see. the job. i used to take her with me when i could,
but it just wasnt always possible. then i used to put her into day care time
zones, but you just cant get reliable time tracking now. you leave them there
in the morning, youve simply no idea how old theyll be in the evening. you
complain till youre blue in the face but it doesnt get you anywhere. i left her
at one of the places for a few hours once, and when i came back shed passed
puberty. ive done all i can, arthur, its over to you. ive got a war to cover.

the ten seconds that passed after trillian left were about the longest of
arthur dents life. time, we know, is relative. you can travel light years
through the stars and back, and if you do it at the speed of light then, when
you return, you may have aged mere seconds while your twin brother or sister
will have aged twenty, thirty, forty or however many years it is, depending on
how far you travelled.
this will come to you as a profound personal shock, particularly if you didnt
know you had a twin brother or sister. the seconds that you have been absent
for will not have been sufficient time to prepare you for the shock of new and
strangely distended family relationships when you return.
ten seconds silence was not enough time for arthur to reassemble his whole
view of himself and his life in a way that suddenly included an entire new

105

daughter of whose merest exist- ence he had had not the slightest inkling of
a suspicion when he had woken that morning. deep, emotional family ties
cannot be constructed in ten seconds, however far and fast you travel away
from them, and arthur could only feel helpless, bewildered and numb as he
looked at the girl standing in his doorway, staring at his floor.
he supposed that there was no point in pretending not to be hopeless.
he walked over and he hugged her.
i dont love you, he said. im sorry. i dont even know you yet. but give
me a few minutes.

we live in strange times.

we also live in strange places: each in a universe of our
own. the people with whom we populate our universes are
the shadows of whole other universes intersecting with our
own. being able to glance out into this bewildering complexity
of infinite recursion and say things like, oh, hi ed! nice tan.
hows carol? involves a great deal of filtering skill for which
all conscious entities have eventually to develop a capacity in
order to protect themselves from the contemplation of the
chaos through which they seethe and tumble. so give your
kid a break, ok?

extract from practical parenting in a fractally
demented universe

whats this?

arthur had almost given up. that is to say, he was not going to give up. he
was absolutely not going to give up. not now. not ever. but if he had been
the sort of person who was going to give up, this was probably the time he
would have done it.
not content with being surly, bad-tempered, wanting to go and play in the pa-
leozoic era, not seeing why they had to have the gravity on the whole time and
shouting at the sun to stop following her, random had also used his carving
knife to dig up stones to throw at the pikka birds for looking at her like that.
arthur didnt even know if lamuella had had a paleozoic era. according to
old thrashbarg the planet had been found fully-formed in the navel of a giant
earwig at four-thirty one vroonday afternoon, and although arthur, as a sea-
soned galactic traveller with good o level passes in physics and geography,
had fairly serious doubts about this, it was rather a waste of time trying to
argue with old thrashbarg and there had never been much point before.

106

chapter 16.

he sighed as he sat nursing the chipped and bent knife. he was going to love
her if it killed him, or her, or both. it wasnt easy being a father. he knew
that no one had ever said it was going to be easy, but that wasnt the point
because hed never asked about being one in the first place.
he was doing his best. every moment that he could wrest away from making
sandwiches he was spending with her, talking to her, walking with her, sitting
on the hill with her watching the sun go down over he valley in which the
village nestled, trying to find out about her life, trying to explain to her about
his. it was a tricky business. the common ground between them, apart from
the fact that they had almost identical genes, was about the size of a pebble.
or rather, it was about the size of trillian and of her they had slightly differing
views.
whats this?
he suddenly realised she had been talking to him and he hadnt noticed. or
rather he had not recognized her voice.
instead of the usual tone of voice in which she spoke to him, which was bitter
and truculent, she was just asking him a simple question.
he looked round in surprise.
she was sitting there on a stool in the corner of the hut in that rather hunched
way she had, knees together, feet splayed out, with her dark hair hanging down
over her face as she looked at something she had cradled in her hands.
arthur went over to her, a little nervously.
her mood swings were very unpredictable but so far theyd all been between
different types of bad ones. outbreaks of bitter recrimination would give way
without warning to abject self-pity and then long bouts of sullen despair which
were punctuated with sudden acts of mindless violence against inanimate ob-
jects and demands to go to electric clubs.
not only were there no electric clubs on lamuella, there were no clubs at all
and, in fact, no electricity. there was a forge and a bakery, a few carts and
a well, but those were the high water mark of lamuellan technology, and a
fair number of randoms unquenchable rages were directed against the sheer
incomprehensible backwardness of the place.
she could pick up sub-etha tv on a small flex-o-panel which had been sur-
gically implanted in her wrist, but that didnt cheer her up at all because it
was full of news of insanely exciting things happening in every other part of
the galaxy than here.
it would also give her frequent news of her mother,
who had dumped her to go off and cover some war which now seemed not to
have happened, or at least to have gone all wrong in some way because of the
absence of any proper intelligence gathering. it also gave her access to lots of
great adventure shows featuring all sorts of fantastically expensive spaceships

107

crashing into each other.
the villagers were absolutely hypnotised by all these wonderful magic images
flashing over her wrist. they had only ever seen one spaceship crash, and it
had been so frightening, violent and shocking and had caused so much horri-
ble devastation, fire and death that, stupidly, they had never realised it was
entertainment.
old thrashbarg had been so astonished by it that he had instantly seen ran-
dom as an emissary from bob, but had fairly soon afterwards decided that in
fact she had been sent as a test of his faith, if not of his patience. he was also
alarmed at the number of spaceship crashes he had to start incorporating into
his holy stories if he was to hold the attention of the villagers, and not have
them rushing off to peer at randoms wrist all the time.
at the moment she was not peering at her wrist. her wrist was turned off.
arthur squatted down quietly beside her to see what she was looking at.
it was his watch. he had taken it off when hed gone to shower under the local
waterfall, and random had found it and was trying to work it out.
its just a watch, he said. its to tell the time.
i know that, she said. but you keep on fiddling with it, and it still doesnt
tell the right time. or even anything like it.
she brought up the display on her wrist panel, which auto- matically produced
a readout of local time. her wrist panel had quietly got on with the business of
measuring the local gravity and orbital momentum, and had noticed where the
sun was and tracked its movement in the sky, all within the first few minutes
of randoms arrival. it had then quickly picked up clues from its environment
as to what the local unit conventions were and reset itself appropriately. it
did this sort of thing continually, which was particularly valuable if you did a
lot of travelling in time as well as space.
random frowned at her fathers watch, which didnt do any of this.
arthur was very fond of it.
it was a better one than he would ever have
afforded himself. he had been given it on his twenty-second birthday by a rich
and guilt-ridden godfather who had forgotten every single birthday he had had
up till then, and also his name. it had the day, the date, the phases of the
moon; it had to albert on his twenty-first birthday and the wrong date
engraved on the battered and scratched surface of its back in letters that were
still just about visible.
the watch had been through a considerahle amount of stuff in the last few
years, most of which would fall well outside the warranty. he didnt suppose,
of course, that the warranty had especially mentioned that the watch was
guaranteed to be accu- rate only within the very particular gravitational and
magnetic fields of the earth, and so long as the day was twenty-four hours long

108

chapter 16.

and the planet didnt explode and so on. these were such basic assumptions
that even the lawyers would have missed them.
luckily his watch was a wind-up one, or at least, a self-winder. nowhere else
in the galaxy would he have found batteries of pre- cisely the dimensions and
power specifications that were perfectly standard on earth.
so what are all these numbers? asked random.
arthur took it from her.
these numbers round the edge mark the hours. in the little window on the
right it says thu, which means thursday, and the number is 14, which means
its the fourteenth day of the month of may which is what it says in this
window over here.
and this sort of crescent-shaped window at the top tells you about the phases
of the moon. in other words it tells you how much of the moon is lit up at
night by the sun, which depends on the relative positions of the sun and the
moon and, well... the earth.
the earth, said random.
yes.
and thats where you came from, and where mum came from.
yes.
random took the watch back from him and looked at it again, clearly baffled
by something. then she held it up to her ear and listened in puzzlement.
whats that noise?
its ticking. thats the mechanism that drives the watch. its called clock-
work. its all kind of interlocking cogs and springs that work to turn the hands
round at exactly the right speed to mark the hours and minutes and days and
so on.
random carried on peering at it.
theres something puzzling you, said arthur. what is it?
yes, said random, at last. whys it all in hardware?

arthur suggested they went for a walk. he felt there were things they
should discuss, and for once random seemed, if not precisely amenable and
willing, then at least not growling.
from randoms point of view this was also all very weird. it wasnt that she
wanted to be difficult, as such, it was just that she didnt know how or what
else to be.
who was this guy? what was this life she was supposed to lead? what was
this world she was supposed to lead it in? and what was this universe that
kept coming at her through her eyes and ears? what was it for? what did it
want?

109

shed been born in a spaceship that had been going from somewhere to some-
where else, and when it had got to some- where else, somewhere else had only
turned out to be another somewhere that you had to get to somewhere else
again from, and so on.
it was her normal expectation that she was supposed to be somewhere else. it
was normal for her to feel that she was in the wrong place.
then, constant time travel had only compounded this problem, and had led
to the feeling that she was not only always in the wrong place, but she was
also almost always there at the wrong time.
she didnt notice that she felt this, because it was the only way she ever felt,
just as it never seemed odd to her that nearly everywhere she went she needed
either to wear weights or anti-gravity suits and usually special apparatus for
breathing as well. the only places you could ever feel right were worlds you
designed for yourself to inhabit - virtual realities in the electric clubs. it had
never occurred to her that the real universe was something you could actually
fit into.
and that included this lamuella place her mother had dumped her in. and it
also included this person who had bestowed on her this precious and magical
gift of life in return for a seat upgrade. it was just as well he had turned out
to be rather kind and friendly or there would have been trouble. really. shed
got a specially sharpened stone in her pocket she could cause a lot of trouble
with.
it can be very dangerous to see things from somebody elses point of view
without the proper training. they sat on the spot that arthur particularly
liked, on the side of a hill overlooking the valley. the sun was going down over
the village.
the only thing that arthur wasnt quite so fond of was being able to see a
little way into the next valley, where a deep dark mangled furrow in the forest
marked the spot where his ship had crashed. but maybe that was what kept
bringing him back here. there were plenty of spots from which you could
survey the lush rolling countryside of lamuella, but this was the one he was
drawn to, with its nagging dark spot of fear and pain nestling just on the edge
of his vision.
he had never been there again since he had been pulled out of the wreckage.
wouldnt.
couldnt bear it.
in fact he had gone some of the way back to it the very next day, while he was
still numb and spinning with shock. he had a broken leg, a couple of broken
ribs, some bad burns and was not really thinking coherently but had insisted
that the villagers take him, which, uneasily, they had. he had not managed

110

chapter 16.

to get right to the actual spot where the ground had bubbled and melted,
however, and had at last hobbled away from the horror for ever.
soon, word had got around that the whole area was haunted and no one had
ventured back there ever since. the land was full of beautiful, verdant and
delightful valleys - no point in going to a highly worrying one. let the past
hold on to itself and let the present move forward into the future.

random cradled the watch in her hands, slowly turning it to let the long
light of the evening sun shine warmly in the scratches and scuffs of the thick
glass. it fascinated her watching the spidery little second hand ticking its way
round. every time it completed a full circle, the longer of the two main hands
had moved on exactly to the next of the sixty small divisions round the dial.
and when the long hand had made its own full circle. the smaller hand had
moved on to the next of the main digits.
youve been watching it for over an hour. said arthur, quietly.
i know, she said. an hour is when the big hand has gone all the way round,
yes?
thats right.
then ive been watching it for an hour and seventeen... minutes.
she smiled with a deep and mysterious pleasure and moved very slightly so
that she was resting just a little. against his arm. arthur felt a small sigh
escape from him that had been pent up inside his chest for weeks. he wanted
to put his arm around his daughters shoulders, but felt it was too early yet
and that she would shy away from him. but something was working. some-
thing was easing inside her. the watch meant something to her that nothing
in her life had so far managed to do. arthur was not sure that he had really
understood what it was yet, but he was profoundly pleased and relieved that
something had reached her.
explain to me again, said random.
theres nothing really to it, said arthur. clockwork was something that
developed over hundreds of years...
earth years.
yes. it became finer and finer and more and more intricate. it was highly
skilled and delicate work. it had to be made very small, and it had to carry
on working accurately however much you waved it around or dropped it.
but only on one planet?
well, that was where it was made, you see. it was never expected to go any-
where else and deal with different suns and moons and magnetic fields and
things. i mean the thing still goes perfectly well, but it doesnt really mean
much this far from switzerland.

111

from where?
switzerland. thats where these were made. small hilly coun- try. tire-
somely neat. the people who made them didnt really know there were other
worlds.
quite a big thing not to know.
well, yes.
so where did they come from?
they, that is we... we just sort of grew there. we evolv- ed on the earth.
from, i dont know, some kind of sludge or something.
like this watch.
um. i dont think the watch grew out of sludge.
you dont understand!
random suddenly leaped to her feet, shouting.
you dont understand! you dont understand me, you dont understand any-
thing! i hate you for being so stupid!
she started to run hectically down the hill, still clutching the watch and shout-
ing that she hated him.
arthur jumped up, startled and at a loss. he started to run after her through
the stringy and clumpy grass. it was hard and painful for him. when he had
broken his leg in the crash, it had not been a clean break, and it had not healed
cleanly. he was stumbling and wincing as he ran.
suddenly she turned and faced him, her face dark with anger.
she brandished the watch at him. you dont understand that theres some-
where this belongs? somewhere it works? somewhere that it fits?
she turned and ran again. she was fit and fleet-footed and arthur could not
remotely keep up with her.
it wasnt that he had not expected being a father to be this difficult, it was
that he hadnt expected to be a father at all, particularly not suddenly and
unexpectedly on an alien planet.
random turned to shout at him again. for some reason he stopped each time
she did.
who do you think i am? she demanded angrily. your upgrade? who do
you think mum thought i was? some sort of ticket to the life she didnt have?
i dont know what you mean by that, said arthur, panting and hurting.
you dont know what anybody means by anything!
what do you mean?
shut up! shut up! shut up!
tell me! please tell me! what does she mean by saying the life she didnt
have?
she wished shed stayed on earth! she wished she hadnt gone off with

112

chapter 16.

that stupid brain-dead fruit gum, zaphod! she thinks she would have had a
different life!
but, said arthur, she would have been killed! she would have been killed
when the world was destroyed!
thats a different life isnt it?
thats...
she wouldnt have had to have me! she hates me!
you cant mean that! how could anyone possibly, er, i mean...
she had me because i was meant to make things fit for her. that was my
job. but i fitted even worse than she did! so she just shut me off and carried
on with her stupid life.
whats stupid about her life? shes fantastically successful, isnt she? shes
all over time and space, all over the sub-etha tv networks...
stupid! stupid! stupid! stupid!
random turned and ran off again. arthur couldnt keep up with her and at
last he had to sit down for a bit and let the pain in his leg subside. the turmoil
in his head he didnt know what to do with at all.

he hobbled into the village an hour later. it was getting dark. the vil-
lagers he passed said hello, but there was a sense of nervousness and of not
quite knowing what was going on or what to do about it in the air. old
thrashbarg had been seen pulling on his beard a fair bit and looking at the
moon, and that was not a good sign either.
arthur went into his hut.
random was sitting hunched quietly over the table.
im sorry, she said. im so sorry.
thats all right, said arthur as gently as he knew how. its good to, well,
to have a little chat. theres so much we have to learn and understand about
each other, and life isnt, well it isnt all just tea and sandwiches...
im so sorry, she said again, sobbing.
arthur went up to her and put his arm round her shoulder. she didnt resist
or pull away. then arthur saw what it was she was so sorry about.
in the pool of light thrown by a lamuellan lantern lay arthurs watch. ran-
dom had forced the back off it with the back edge of the butter spreading
knife, and all of the minute cogs and springs and levers were lying in a tiny
cock-eyed mess where shed been fiddling with them.
i just wanted to see how it worked, said random, how it all fitted to-
gether. im so sorry! i cant get it back together. im sorry, im sorry, im
sorry. i dont know what to do. ill get it repaired! really! ill get it repaired!

113

the following day thrashbarg came round and said all sorts of bob stuff.
he tried to exert a calming influence by inviting random to let her mind dwell
on the ineffable mystery of the giant earwig, and random said there was no
giant earwig and thrashbarg went very cold and silent and said she would be
cast into outer darkness. random said good, shed been born there, and the
next day the parcel arrived.

this was all getting a bit eventful.

in fact, when the parcel arrived, delivered by a kind of robot drone that
dropped out of the sky making droning robot noises, it brought with it a
sense which gradually began to permeate through the whole village, that it
was almost one event too many.
it wasnt the robot drones fault. all it required was arthur dents signature
or thumb print, or just a few scrapings of skin cells from the nape of his neck
and it would be on its way again.
it hung around waiting, not quite sure
what all this resentment was about. meanwhile, kirp had caught another fish
with a head at both ends, but on closer inspection it turned out that it was in
fact two fish cut in half and sewn together rather badly, so not only had kirp
failed to rekindle any great interest in two-headed fish but he had seriously
cast doubt on the authenticity of the first one. only the pikka birds seemed
to feel that everything was exactly normal.
the robot drone got arthurs signature and made its escape. arthur bore the
parcel back to his hut and sat and looked at it.
lets open it! said random, who was feeling much more cheerful this morn-
ing now that everything around her had got thoroughly weird, but arthur said
no.
why not?
its not addressed to me.
yes, it is.
no, it isnt. its addressed to... well, its addressed to ford prefect, in care
of me.
ford prefect? is he the one who...
yes, said arthur tartly.
ive heard about him.
i expect you have.
let s open it anyway. what else are we going to do?
i dont know, said arthur, who really wasnt sure. he had taken his dam-
aged knives over to the forge bright and early that morning and strinder had
had a look at them and said that he would see what he could do.
they had tried the usual business of waving the knives through the air, feeling

114

chapter 16.

for the point of balance and the point of flex and so on, but the joy was gone
from it, and arthur had a sad feeling that his sandwich making days were
probably numbered.
he hung his head.
the next appearance of the perfectly normal beasts was imminent, but arthur
felt that the usual festivities of hunting and feasting were going to be rather
muted and uncertain. something had happened here on lamuella, and arthur
had a horrible feeling that it was him.
what do you think it is? urged random, turning the parcel over in her
hands.
i dont know, said arthur. something bad and worrying, though.
how do you know? random protested.
because anything to do with ford prefect is bound to be worse and more
worrying than something that isnt, said arthur. believe me.
youre upset about something, arent you? said random.
arthur sighed.
im just feeling a little jumpy and unsettled, i think, said arthur.
im sorry, said random, and put the package down again. she could see
that it really would upset him if she opened it. she would just have to do it
when he wasnt looking.



arthur wasnt quite certain which he noticed as being missing first. when he
noticed that the one wasnt there his mind instantly leapt to the other and he
knew immediately that they were both gone and that something insanely bad
and difficult to deal with would happen as a result.
random was not there. and neither was the parcel.
he had left it up on a shelf all day, in plain view. it was an exercise in trust.
he knew that one of the things he was supposed to do as a parent was to show
trust in his child, to build a sense of trust and confidence into the bedrock of
relationship between them. he had had a nasty feeling that that might be an
idiotic thing to do, but he did it anyway, and sure enough it had turned out
to be an idiotic thing to do. you live and learn. at any rate, you live.
you also panic.
arthur ran out of the hut. it was the middle of the evening. the light was
getting dim and a storm was brewing. he could not see her anywhere, nor any
sign of her. he asked. no one had seen her. he asked again. no one else had
seen her. they were going home for the night . a little wind was whipping
round the edge of the village, picking things up and tossing them around in a
dangerously casual manner.
he found old thrashbarg and asked him. thrashbarg looked at him stonily,
and then pointed in the one direction that arthur had dreaded, and had there-
fore instinctively known was the way she would have gone.
so now he knew the worst.
she had gone where she thought he would not follow her.
he looked up at the sky, which was sullen, streaked and livid, and reflected
that it was the sort of sky that the four horsemen of the apocalypse wouldnt
feel like a bunch of complete idiots riding out of.
with a heavy sense of the utmost foreboding he set off on the track that led
to the forest in the next valley. the first heavy blobs of rain began to hit the116

chapter 17.

ground as arthur tried to drag himself to some sort of run.

random reached the crest of the hill and looked down into the next valley.
it had been a longer and harder climb than she had anticipated. she was a
little worried that doing the trip at night was not that great an idea, but her
father had been mooching around near the hut all day trying to pretend to
either her or himself that he wasnt guarding the parcel. at last hed had to
go over to the forge to talk with strinder about the knives, and random had
seized her opportunity and done a runner with the parcel.
it was perfectly clear that she couldnt just open the thing there, in the hut,
or even in the village. he might have come across her at any moment. which
meant that she had to go where she wouldnt be followed.
she could stop where she was now. she had gone this way in the hope that
he wouldnt follow her. and even if he did he would never find her up in the
wooded parts of the hill with night drawing in and the rain starting.
all the way up, the parcel had been jiggling under her arm. it was a satis-
fyingly hunky sort of thing: a box with a square top about the length of her
forearm on each side, and about the length of her hand deep, wrapped up in
brown plasper with an ingenious new form of self-knotting string. it didnt
rattle as she shook it, but she sensed that its weight was concentrated excit-
ingly at the centre.
having come so far, though, there was a certain satisfaction in not stopping
here, but carrying on down into what seemed to be almost a forbidden area -
where her fathers ship had come down. she wasnt exactly certain what the
word haunted meant, but it might be fun to find out. she would keep going
and save the parcel up for when she got there.
it was getting darker, though. she hadnt used her tiny electric torch yet,
because she didnt want to be visible from a distance. she would have to use
it now, but it probably didnt matter since she would be on the other side of
the hill which divided the valleys from each other.
she turned her torch on. almost at the same moment a fork of lightning ripped
across the valley into which she was heading and startled her considerably. as
the darkness shuddered back around her and a clap of thunder rolled out across
the land she felt suddenly rather small and lost with just a feeble pencil of light
bobbing in her hand. perhaps she should stop after all and open the parcel
here. or maybe she should go back and come out again tomorrow. it was only
a momentary hesitation, though. she knew there was no going back tonight,
and sensed that there was no going back ever.
she headed on down the side of the hill. the rain was beginning to pick up
now. where a short while ago it had been a few heavy blobs it was settling in

117

for a good pour now, hissing in the trees, and the ground was getting slippery
under her feet.
at least, she thought it was the rain hissing in the trees. shadows were leap-
ing and leering at her as her light bobbed through the trees. onwards and
downwards.
she hurried on for another ten or fifteen minutes, soaked to the skin now and
shivering, and gradually became aware that there seemed to be some other
light somewhere ahead of her. it was very faint and she wasnt certain if she
was imagining it or not. she turned off her torch to see. there did seem to be
some sort of dim glow ahead. she couldnt tell what it was. she turned her
torch back on and continued down the hill, towards whatever it was.
there was something wrong with the woods though.
she couldnt immediately say what it was, but they didnt seem like sprightly
healthy woods looking forward to a good spring. the trees were lolling at sickly
angles and had a sort of pallid, blighted look about them. random more than
once had the worrying sensation that they were trying to reach towards her as
she passed them, but it was just a trick of the way that her light caused their
shadows to flicker and lurch.
suddenly, something fell out of a tree in front of her. she leapt backwards with
alarm, dropping both the torch and the box as she did so. she went down into
a crouch, pulling the specially sharpened rock out of her pocket.
the thing that had fallen out of the tree was moving. the torch was lying
on the ground and pointing towards it, and a vast, grotesque shadow was
slowly lurching through the light towards her. she could hear faint rustling
and screeching noises over the steady hiss of the rain. she scrabbled on the
ground for the torch, found it, and shone it directly at the creature.
at the same moment another dropped from a tree just a few feet away. she
swung the torch wildly from one to another. she held her rock up, ready to
throw.
they were quite small in fact. it was the angle of the light that had made
them loom so large. not only small. but small, furry and cuddly. and there
was another, dropping from the trees. it fell through the beam of light, so she
saw it quite clearly.
it fell neatly and precisely, turned, and then, like the other two, started slowly
and purposefully to advance on random.
she stayed rooted to the spot. she still had her rock. poised and ready to
throw, but was increasingly conscious of the fact that the things she had it
poised and ready to throw at were squirrels. or at least, squirrel-like things.
soft, warm, cuddly squirrel-like things advancing on her in a way she wasnt
at all certain she liked.

118

chapter 17.

she shone her torch directly on the first of them. it was making aggressive,
hectoring, screeching noises, and carrying in one of its little fists a small tat-
tered piece of wet, pink rag. random hefted her rock menacingly in her hand,
but it made no impression at all on the squirrel advancing on her with its wet
piece of rag.
she backed away. she didnt know at all how to deal with this. if they had
been vicious snarling slavering beasts with glistening fangs she would have
pitched into them with a will, but squirrels behaving like this she couldnt
quite handle.
she backed away again. the second squirrel was starting to make a flanking
manoeuvre round to her right. carrying a cup. some kind of acorn thing. the
third was right behind it and making its own advance. what was it carrying?
some little scrap of soggy paper, random thought.
she stepped back again, caught her ankle against the root of a tree and fell
over backwards.
instantly the first squirrel darted forward and was on top of her, advancing
along her stomach with cold purpose. in its eyes, and a piece of wet rag in its
fist.
random tried to jump up, but only managed to jump about an inch. the
startled movement of the squirrel on her stomach startled her in return. the
squirrel froze, gripping her skin through her soaking shirt with its tiny claws.
then slowly, inch by inch, it made its way up her, stopped, and proffered her
the rag.
she felt almost hypnotised by the strangeness of the thing and its tiny glinting
eyes. it proffered her the rag again. it pushed it at her repeatedly, screeching
insistently, till at last, nervously, hesitantly, she took the thing from it.
it
continued to watch her intently, its eyes darting all over her face . she had no
idea what to do. rain and mud were streaming down her face and she had a
squirrel sitting on her. she wiped some mud out of her eyes with the rag.
the squirrel shrieked triumphantly, grabbed the rag hack, leapt off her, ran
scampering into the dark, enclosing night, darted up into a tree, dived into a
hole in the trunk, settled back and lit a cigarette.
meanwhile random was trying to fend off the squirrel with the acorn cup full
of rain and the one with the paper. she shuffled backwards on her bottom.
no! she shouted. go away!
they darted back, in fright, and then darted right forward again with their
gifts. she brandished her rock at them. go! she yelled.
the squirrels scampered round in consternation. then one darted straight at
her, dropped the acorn cup in her lap, turned and ran off into the night. the
other stood quivering for a moment, then put its scrap of paper neatly down

119

in front of her and disappeared as well.
she was alone again, but trembling with confusion. she got unsteadily to her
feet, picked up her rock and her parcel, then paused and picked up the scrap
of paper as well. it was so soggy and dilapidated it was hard to make out what
it was. it seemed just to be a fragment of an in-flight magazine.
just as random was trying to understand exactly what it was that this all
meant, a man walked out into the clearing in which she was standing, raised
a vicious-looking gun and shot her.

arthur was thrashing around hopelessly two or three miles behind her, on

the upward side of the hill.
within minutes of setting out he had gone back again and equipped himself
with a lamp. not an electric one. the only electric light in the place was
the one that random had brought with her. this was a kind of dim hurri-
cane lamp: a perforated metal canister from strinders forge, which contained
a reservoir of inflammable fish oil, a wick of knotted dried grass and was
wrapped in a translucent film made from dried membranes from the gut of a
perfectly normal beast.
it had now gone out.
arthur jiggled around with it in a thoroughly pointless kind of a way for a few
seconds. there was clearly no way he was going to get the thing suddenly to
burst into flame again in the middle of a rainstorm, but its impossible not to
make a token effort. reluctantly he threw the thing aside.
what to do? this was hopeless. he was absolutely sodden, his clothes heavy
and billowing with the rain, and now he was lost in the dark as well.
for a brief second he was lost in the blinding light, and then he was lost in the
dark again.
the sheet of lightning had at least shown him that he was very close to the
brow of the hill. once he had breasted that he would... well, he wasnt certain
what he would do. hed have to work that out when he got there.
he limped forward and upwards.
a few minutes later he knew that he was standing panting at the top. there
was some kind of dim glow in the distance below him. he had no idea what it
was, and indeed he hardly liked to think. it was the only thing he had to make
towards, though, so he started to make his way, stumbling, lost and frightened
towards it.

the flash of lethal light passed straight through random and, about two
seconds later, so did the man who had shot it. other than that he paid her no
attention whatsoever. he had shot someone standing behind her, and when

120

chapter 17.

she turned to look, he was kneeling over the body and going through its pock-
ets.
the tableau froze and vanished. it was replaced a second later by a giant pair
of teeth framed by immense and perfectly glossed red lips. a huge blue brush
appeared out of nowhere and started foamily to scrub at the teeth, which con-
tinued to hang there gleaming in the shimmering curtain of rain.
random blinked at it twice before she got it.
it was a commercial. the guy who had shot her was part of a holographic
in-flight movie. she must now be very close to where the ship had crashed.
obviously some of its systems were more indestructible than others.
the next half-mile of the journey was particularly trouble- some. not only
did she have the cold and the rain and the night to contend with, but also
the fractured and thrashing remains of the ships on-board entertainment sys-
tem. spaceships and jetcars and helipods crashed and exploded continuously
around her, illuminating the night, villainous people in strange hats smug-
gled dangerous drugs through her, and the combined orchestra and chorus of
the hallapolis state opera performed the closing march of the anjaqantine
star guard from act iv of rizgars blamwellamum of woont in a little glade
somewhere off to her left.
and then she was standing on the lip of a very nasty looking and bubbly-edged
crater. there was still a faint warm glow coming from what would otherwise
have looked like an enormous piece of caramelised chewing gum in the centre
of the pit: the melted remains of a great spaceship.
she stood looking at it for a longish while, and then at last started to walk
along and around the edge of the crater. she was no longer certain what she
was looking for, but kept moving anyway, keeping the horror of the pit to her
left.
the rain was beginning to ease off a little, but it was still extremely wet, and
since she didnt know what it was that was in the box, whether it was perhaps
something delicate or dam- ageable, she thought she ought to find somewhere
reasonably dry to open it. she hoped she hadnt already damaged it by drop-
ping it.
she played her torch around the surrounding trees, which were thin on the
ground here, and mostly charred and broken.
in the middle distance she
thought she could see a jumbled outcrop of rock which might provide some
shelter, and she started to pick her way towards it. all around she found the
detritus that had been ejected from the ship as it broke up, before the final
fireball.
after she had moved two or three hundred yards from the edge of the crater
she came across the tattered fragments of some fluffy pink material, sodden,

121

muddied and drooping amongst the broken trees. she guessed, correctly, that
this must be the remains of the escape cocoon that had saved her fathers life.
she went and looked at it more closely, and then noticed something close to it
on the ground, half covered in mud.
she picked it up and wiped the mud off it.
it was some kind of electronic
device the size of a small book. feebly glowing on its cover, in response to
her touch, were some large friendly letters. they said dont panic. she
knew what this was. it was her fathers copy of the hitch hikers guide to
the galaxy.
she felt instantly reassured by it, turned her head up to the thundery sky and
let some. rain wash over her face and into her mouth.
she shook her head and hurried on towards the rocks. clamber- ing up and
over them she almost immediately found the perfect thing. the mouth of a
cave. she played her torch into its inte- rior. it seemed to be dry and safe.
picking her way carefully, she walked in. it was quite spacious, but didnt go
that deep. exhausted and relieved she sat on a convenient rock, put the box
down in front of her and started immediately to open it.

122

chapter 17.



for a long period of time there was much speculation and controversy about
where the so-called missing matter of the universe had got to. all over the
galaxy the science depart- ments of all the major universities were acquiring
more and more elaborate equipment to probe and search the hearts of distant
galaxies, and then the very centre and the very edges of the whole universe,
but when eventually it was tracked down it turned out in fact to he all the
stuff which the equipment had been packed in.
there was quite a large quantity of missing matter in the box, little soft round
white pellets of missing matter, which random discarded for future genera-
tions of physicists to track down and discover all over again once the findings
of the current generation of physicists had been lost and forgotten about.
out of the pellets of missing matter she lifted the featureless black disk. she
put it down on a rock beside her and sifted amongst all the missing matter to
see if there was anything else, a manual or some attachments or something,
but there was nothing else at all. just the black disk.
she shone the torch on it.
as she did so, cracks began to appear along its apparently featureless surface.
random backed away nervously, but then saw that the thing, whatever it was,
was merely unfolding itself.
the process was wonderfully beautiful. it was extraordinarily elaborate but
also simple and elegant. it was like a piece of self-opening origami, or a rose-
bud blooming into a rose in just a few seconds.
where just a few moments earlier there had been a smoothly curved black disk
there was now a bird. a bird, hovering there.
random continued to back away from it, carefully and watch- fully.
it was a little like a pikka bird, only rather smaller. that is to say, in fact it
was larger, or to be more exact, precisely the same size or, at least, not less
than twice the size. it was also both a lot bluer and a lot pinker than pikka124

chapter 18.

birds, while at the same time being perfectly black.
there was also something very odd about it, which random couldnt immedi-
ately make out.
it certainly shared with pikka birds the impression it gave that it was watching
something that you couldnt see.
suddenly it vanished.
then, just as suddenly everything went black. random drop- ped into a tense
crouch, feeling for the specially sharpened rock in her pocket again. then the
blackness receded and rolled itself up into a ball and then the blackness was
the bird again. it hung in the air in front of her, beating its wings slowly and
staring at her.
excuse me, it said suddenly, i just have to calibrate myself. can you hear
me when i say this?
when you say what? demanded random.
good, said the bird. and can you hear me when i say this? it spoke this
time at a much higher pitch.
yes, of course i can! said random.
and can you hear me when i say this? it said, this time in a sepulchrally
deep voice.
yes!
there was then a pause.
no obviously not, said the bird after a few seconds. good, well your hear-
ing range is obviously between 20 and 16 khz. so. is this comfortable for
you? it said in a pleasant light tenor. no uncomfortable harmonics screech-
ing away in the upper register? obviously not. good. i can use those as data
channels. now. how many of me can you see?
suddenly the air was full of nothing but interlocking birds. random was well
used to spending time in virtual realities, but this was something far weirder
than anything she had previously encountered. it was as if the whole geometry
of space was redefined in seamless bird shapes.
random gasped and flung her arms round her face, her arms moving through
bird-shaped space.
hmmm, obviously way too many, said the bird. how about now?
it concertina-ed into a tunnel of birds, as if it was a bird caught between par-
allel mirrors, reflecting infinitely into the distance.
what are you? shouted random.
well come to that in a minute, said the bird. just how many, please?
well, youre sort of... random gestured helplessly off into the distance.
i see, still infinite in extent, but at least were homing in on the right dimen-
sional matrix. good. no, the answer is an orange and two lemons.

125

lemons?
if i have three lemons and three oranges and i lose two oranges and a lemon
what do i have left?
huh?
ok, so you think that time flows that way, do you? interesting. am i still
infinite? it asked, ballooning this way and that in space. am i infinite now?
how yellow am i?
moment by moment the bird was going through mind-mangling transforma-
tions of shape and extent.
i cant... said random bewildered.
you dont have to answer, i can tell from watching you now. so. am i your
mother? am i a rock? do i seem huge, squishy and sinuously intertwined?
no? how about now? am i going backwards?
for once the bird was perfectly still and steady.
no, said random.
well i was in fact, i was moving backwards in time. hmmm. well i think
weve sorted all that out now. if youd like to know, i can tell you that in your
universe you move freely in three dimensions that you call space. you move in
a straight line in a fourth, which you call time, and stay rooted to one place in
a fifth, which is the first fundamental of probability. after that it gets a hit
complicated, and theres all sorts of stuff going on in dimensions 13 to 22 that
you really wouldnt want to know about. all you really need to know for the
moment is that the universe is a lot more complicated than you might think,
even if you start from a position of thinking its pretty damn complicated in
the first place. i can easily not say words like damn if it offends you.
say what you damn well like.
i will.
what the hell are you? demanded random.
i am the guide. in your universe i am your guide. in fact i inhabit what
is technically known as the whole sort of general mish mash which means...
well, let me show you.
it turned in mid-air and swooped out of the cave, and then perched on a rock,
just beneath an overhang, out of the rain, which was getting heavier again.
come on, it said, watch this.
random didnt like being bossed around by a bird, but she followed it to the
mouth of the cave anyway, still fingering the rock in her pocket.
rain, said the bird. you see? just rain.
i know what rain is.
sheets of the stuff were sweeping through the night, moonlight sifting through
it.

126

chapter 18.

so what is it?
what do you mean, what is it? look, who are you? what were you doing
in that box? why have i spent a night running through the forest fending off
demented squirrels to find that all ive got at the end of it is a bird asking me
what rain is. its just water falling through the bloody air, thats what it is.
anything else you want to know or can we go home now?
there was a long pause before the bird answered, you want to go home?
i havent got a home! random almost shocked herself, she screamed the
words so loudly.
look into the rain... said the bird guide.
im looking into the rain! what else is there to look at?
what do you see?
what do you mean, you stupid bird? i just see a load of rain. its just water,
falling.
what shapes do you see in the water?
shapes? there arent any shapes. its just, just...
just a mish mash, said the bird guide.
yes...
now what do you see?
just on the very edge of visibility a thin faint beam fanned out of the birds
eyes. in the dry air beneath the overhang there was nothing to see. where
the beam hit the drops of rain as they fell through it, there was a flat sheet of
light, so bright and vivid it seemed solid.
oh great. a laser show, said random fractiously. never seen one of those
before, of course, except at about five million rock concerts.
tell me what you see!
just a flat sheet! stupid bird.
theres nothing there that wasnt there before. im just using light to draw
your attention to certain drops at certain moments. now what do you see?
the light shut off.
nothing.
im doing exactly the same thing, but with ultra-violet light. you cant see
it.
so whats the point of showing me something i cant see?
so that you understand that just because you see something, it doesnt mean
to say its there. and if you dont see something it doesnt mean to say its
not there, its only what your senses bring to your attention.
im bored with this, said random, and then gasped.
hanging in the rain was a giant and very vivid three-dimen- sional image of
her father looking startled about something.

127

about two miles away behind random, her father, struggling his way
through the woods suddenly stopped. he was startled to see an image of
himself looking startled about something hanging brightly in the rain-filled air
about two miles away. about two miles away some distance to the right of the
direction in which he was heading.
he was almost completely lost, convinced he was going to die of cold and wet
and exhaustion and beginning to wish he could just get on with it. he had
just been brought an entire golfing magazine by a squirrel, as well, and his
brain. was beginning to howl and gibber.
seeing a huge bright image of himself light up in the sky told him that, on
balance, he was probably right to howl and gibber but probably wrong as far
as the direction he was heading was concerned.
taking a deep breath, he turned and headed off towards the inexplicable light
show.

ok, so whats that supposed to prove? demanded random. it was the
fact that the image was her father that had startled her rather than the ap-
pearance of the image itself. she had seen her first hologram when she was
two months old and had been put in it to play. she had seen her most recent
one about half an hour ago playing the march of the anjaqantine star guard.
only that its no more there or not there than the sheet was, said the bird.
its just the interaction of water from the sky moving in one direction, with
light at frequencies your senses can detect moving in another. it makes an ap-
parently solid image in your mind. but its all just images in the mish mash.
heres another one for you.
my mother! said random.
no, said the bird.
i know my mother when i see her!
the image was of a woman emerging from a spacecraft inside a large, grey
hangar-like building. she was being escorted by a group of tall, thin purplish-
green creatures. it was definite- ly randoms mother. well, almost definitely.
trillian wouldnt have been walking quite so uncertainly in low gravity, or
looking around her at a boring old life-support environment with quite such a
disbelieving look on her face, or carrying such a quaint old camera.
so who is it? demanded random.
she is part of the extent of your mother on the probability axis, said the
bird guide.
i havent the faintest idea what you mean.
space, time and probability all have axes along which it is possible to move.

128

chapter 18.

still dunno. though i think... no. explain.
i thought you wanted to go home.
explain!
would you like to see your home?
see it? it was destroyed!
it is discontinuous along the probability axis. look!
something very strange and wonderful now swam into view in the rain. it was
a huge, bluish-greenish globe, misty and cloud-covered, turning with. majestic
slowness against a black, starry background.
now you see it, said the bird. now you dont.

a little less than two miles away, now, arthur dent stood still in his tracks.
he could not believe what he could see, hanging there, shrouded in rain, but
brilliant and vividly real against the night sky - the earth. he gasped at the
sight of it. then, at the moment he gasped, it disappeared again. then it
appeared again. then, and this was the bit that made him give up and stick
straws in his hair, it turned into a sausage.

random was also startled by the sight of this huge, blue and green and
watery and misty sausage hanging above her. and now it was a string of
sausages, or rather it was a string of sausages in which many of the sausages
were missing. the whole brilliant string turned and span in a bewildering
dance in the air and then gradually slowed, grew insubstantial and faded into
the glistening darkness of the night.
what was that? asked random, in a small voice.
a glimpse along the probability axis of a discontinuously probable object.
i see.
most objects mutate and change along their axis of prob- ability, but the
world of your origin does something slightly different.
it lies on what you
might call a fault line in the landscape of probability which means that at
many probability co-ordinates, the whole of it simply ceases to exist. it has
an inherent instability, which is typical of anything that lies within what are
usually designated the plural sectors. make sense?
no.
want to go and see for yourself?
to... earth?
yes.
is that possible?
the bird guide did not answer at once. it spread its wings and, with an easy
grace, ascended into the air and flew out into the rain which, once again, was

129

beginning to lighten.
it soared ecstatically up into the night sky, lights flashed around it, dimensions
dithered in its wake. it swooped and turned and looped and turned again and
came at last to rest two feet in front of randoms face, its wings beating slowly
and silently.
it spoke to her again.
your universe is vast to you. vast in time, vast in space. thats because of
the filters through which you perceive it. but i was built with no filters at all,
which means i perceive the mish mash which contains all possible universes
but which has, itself, no size at all. for me, anything is possible. i am omni-
scient and omnipotent, extremely vain, and, what is more, i come in a handy
self-carrying package. you have to work out how much of the above is true.
a slow smile spread over randoms face.
you bloody little thing. youve been winding me up!
as i said, anything is possible.
random laughed. ok, she said. lets try and go to earth. lets go to
earth at some point on its, er...
probability axis?
yes. where it hasnt been blown up. ok. so youre the guide. how do we
get a lift?
reverse engineering.
what?
reverse engineering. to me the flow of time is irrelevant. you decide what
you want. i then merely make sure that it has already happened.
youre joking.
anything is possible.
random frowned. you are joking arent you?
let me put it another way, said the bird. reverse engineering enables us to
shortcut all the business of waiting for one of the horribly few spaceships that
passes through your galactic sector every year or so to make up its mind about
whether or not it feels like giving you a lift. you want a lift a ship arrives and
gives you one. the pilot may think he has any one of a million reasons why he
has decided to stop and pick you up. the real reason is that i have determined
that he will.
this is you being extremely vain isnt it, little bird?
the bird was silent.
ok, said random. i want a ship to take me to earth.
will this one do?
it was so silent that random had not noticed the descending spaceship until
it was nearly on top of her.

130

chapter 18.

arthur had noticed it. he was a mile away now and closing. just after the
illuminated sausage display had drawn to its conclusion he had noticed the
faint glimmerings of further lights coming down out of the clouds and had, to
begin with, assumed it to be another piece of flashy son et lumiere.
it took a moment or so for it to dawn on him that it was an actual spaceship,
and a moment or two longer for him to realise that it was dropping directly
down to where he assumed his daughter to be. that was when, rain or no
rain, leg injury or no leg injury, darkness or no darkness, he suddenly started
really to run.
he fell almost immediately, slid and hurt his knee quite badly on a rock. he
slithered back up to his feet and tried again. he had a horrible cold feeling
that he was about to lose random for ever. limping and cursing, he ran. he
didnt know what it was that had been in the box, but the name on it had
been ford prefect, and that was the name he cursed as he ran.

the ship was one of the sexiest and most beautiful ones that random had

ever seen.
it was astounding. silver, sleek, ineffable.
if she didnt know better she would have said it was an rw6. as it settled
silently beside her she realised that it actually was an rw6 and she could
scarcely breathe for excitement. an rw6 was the sort of thing you only saw
in the sort of magazines that were designed to provoke civil unrest.
she was also extremely nervous. the manner and timing of its arrival was
deeply unsettling. either it was the most bizarre coincidence or something
very peculiar and worrying was going on. she waited a little tensely for the
ships hatch to open. her guide - she thought of it as hers now - was hovering
lightly over her right shoulder, its wings barely fluttering.
the hatch opened. just a little dim light escaped. a moment or two passed
and a figure emerged. he stood still for a moment or so, obviously trying to
accustom his eyes to the darkness. then he caught sight of random standing
there, and seemed a little surprised. he started to walk towards her. then
suddenly he shouted in surprise and started to run at her.
random was not a good person to take a run at on a dark night when she was
feeling a little strung out. she had unconsciously been fingering the rock in
her pocket from the moment she saw the craft coming down.

still running, slithering, hurtling, bumping into trees, arthur saw at last
that he was too late. the ship had only been on the ground for about three
minutes, and now, silently, gracefully it was rising up above the trees again,

131

turning smoothly in the fine speckle of rain to which the storm had now abated,
climbing, climbing, tipping up its nose and, suddenly, effortlessly, hurtling up
through the clouds.
gone. random was in it. it was impossible for arthur to know this, but he
just went ahead and knew it anyway. she was gone. he had had his stint at
being a parent and could scarcely believe how badly he had done at it. he
tried to continue run- ning, but his feet were dragging, his knee was hurting
like fury and he knew that he was too late.
he could not conceive that he could feel more wretched and awful than this,
but he was wrong.
he limped his way at last to the cave where random had sheltered and opened
the box. the ground bore the indentations of the spacecraft that had landed
there only minutes before, but of random there was no sign. he wandered
disconsolately into the cave, found the empty box and piles of missing matter
pellets strewn around the place. he felt a little cross about that. hed tried
to teach her about cleaning up after herself. feeling a bit cross with her about
something like that helped him feel less desolate about her leaving. he knew
he had no means of finding her.
his foot knocked against something unexpected. he bent down to pick it up,
and was thoroughly surprised to discover what it was. it was his old hitch
hikers guide to the galaxy. how did that come to be in the cave? he had
never returned to collect it from the scene of the crash. he had not wanted
to revisit the crash and he had not wanted the guide again. he had reckoned
he was here on lamuella, making sandwiches for good. how did it come to be
in the cave? it was active. the words on the cover flashed dont panic at
him.
he went out of the cave again into the dim and damp moonlight. he sat on
a rock to have a look through the old guide, and then discovered it wasnt a
rock, it was a person.

132

chapter 18.



arthur leapt to his feet with a start of fear. it would be hard to say which he
was more frightened of: that he. might have hurt the person he had inadver-
tently sat on or that the person he had inadvertently sat on would hurt him
back.
there seemed, on inspection, to be little immediate cause for alarm on the
second count. whoever it was he had sat on was unconscious. that would
probably go a great deal of the way towards explaining what he was doing
lying there. he seemed to be breathing ok, though. arthur felt his pulse.
that was ok as well.
he was lying on his side, half curled up. it was so long ago and far away when
arthur had last done first aid that he really couldnt remember what it was
he was supposed to do. the first thing he was supposed to do, he remembered,
was to have a first aid kit about his person. damn.
should he roll him on to his back or not? suppose he had any broken bones?
suppose he swallowed his tongue? suppose he sued him? who, apart from
anything else, was he?
at that moment the unconscious man groaned loudly and rolled himself over.
arthur wondered if he should -
he looked at him.
he looked at him again.
he looked at him again, just to make absolutely sure.
despite the fact that he had been thinking he was feeling about as low as he
possibly could, he experienced a terrible sinking feeling.
the figure groaned again and slowly opened his eyes. it took him a while to
focus, then he blinked and stiffened.
you! said ford prefect.
you! said arthur dent.
ford groaned again.134

chapter 19.

what do you need to have explained this time? he said, and closed his eyes
in some kind of despair.

five minutes later he was sitting up and rubbing the side of his head, where

he had quite a large swelling.
who the hell was that woman? he said. why are we sur- rounded by
squirrels, and what do they want?
ive been pestered by squirrels all night, said arthur. they keep on trying
to give me magazines and stuff.
ford frowned. really? he said.
and bits of rag.
ford thought.
oh, he said. is this near where your ship crashed?
yes, said arthur. he said it a little tightly.
thats probably it. can happen. ships cabin robots get destroyed. the cy-
berminds that control them survive and start infesting the local wildlife. can
turn a whole ecosystem into some kind of helpless thrashing service industry,
handing out hot towels and drinks to passers-by. should be a law against it.
probably is. probably also a law against there being a law against it so every-
body can get nice and worked up. hey ho. what did you say?
i said, and the woman is my daughter.
ford stopped rubbing his head.
say that one more time.
i said, said arthur huffily, the woman is my daughter.
i didnt know, said ford, that you had a daughter.
well, theres probably a lot you dont know about me, said arthur. come
to mention it, theres probably a lot i dont know about me either.
well, well, well. when did this happen then?
im not quite sure.
that sounds like more familiar territory, said ford. is there a mother in-
volved?
trillian.
trillian? i didnt think that...
no. look, its a bit embarrassing.
i remember she told me once she had a kid but only, sort of, in passing. im
in touch with her from time to time. never seen her with the kid.
arthur said nothing.
ford started to feel the side of his head again in some bemusement.
are you sure this was your daughter? he said.
tell me what happened.

135

phroo. long story. i was coming to pick up this parcel id sent to myself
here care of you...
well, what was that all about?
i think it may be something unimaginably dangerous.
and you sent it to me? protested arthur.
safest place i could think of. i thought i could rely on you to be absolutely
boring and not open it. anyway, coming in at night i couldnt find this village
place. i was going by pretty basic information. i couldnt find any signal of
any kind. i guess you dont have signals and stuff here.
thats what i like about it.
then i did pick up a faint signal from your old copy of the guide, so i homed
in on that, thinking that would take me to you. i found id landed in some
kind of wood. couldnt figure out what was going on. i get out, and then see
this woman standing there. i go up to say hello, then suddenly i see that shes
got this thing!
what thing?
the thing i sent you! the new guide! the bird thing! you were meant
to keep it safe, you idiot, but this woman had the thing right there by her
shoulder. i ran forward and she hit me with a rock.
i see, said arthur. what did you do?
well, i fell over of course. i was very badly hurt. she and the bird started to
make off towards my ship. and when i say my ship, i mean an rw6.
a what?
an rw6 for zarks sake. ive got this great relationship going now between
my credit card and the guides central computer. you would not believe that
ship, arthur, its...
so an rw6 is a spaceship, then?
yes! its - oh never mind. look, just get some kind of grip will you, arthur?
or at least get some kind of catalogue. at this point i was very worried. and,
i think, semi-concussed. i was down on my knees and bleeding profusely, so i
did the only thing i could think of, which was to beg. i said, please for zarks
sake dont take my ship. and dont leave me stranded in the middle of some
primitive zarking forest with no medical help and a head injury. i could be in
serious trouble and so could she.
what did she say?
she hit me on the head with the rock again.
i think i can confirm that that was my daughter.
sweet kid.
you have to get to know her, said arthur.
she eases up does she?

136

chapter 19.

no, said arthur, but you get a better sense of when to duck.
ford held his head and tried to see straight.
the sky was beginning to lighten in the west, which was where the sun rose.
arthur didnt particularly want to see it. the last thing he wanted after a
hellish night like this one was some blasted day coming along and barging
about the place.
what are you doing in a place like this, arthur? demanded ford.
well, said arthur, making sandwiches mostly.
what?
i am, probably was, the sandwich maker for a small tribe. it was a bit em-
barrassing really. when i first arrived, that is, when they rescued me from the
wreckage of this super high-technology spacecraft which had crashed on their
planet, they were very nice to me and i thought i should help them out a bit.
you know, im an educated chap from a high-technology culture, i could show
them a thing or two. and of course i couldnt. i havent got the faintest idea,
when it comes down to it, of how anything actually works. i dont mean like
video-recorders, nobody knows how to work those. i mean just something like
a pen or an artesian well or something. not the foggiest. i couldnt help at
all. one day i got glum and made myself a sandwich. that suddenly got them
all excited. theyd never seen one before. it was just an idea that had never
occurred to them, and i happen to quite like making sandwiches, so it all sort
of developed from there.
and you enjoyed that?
well, yes, i think i sort of did, really. getting a good set of knives, that sort
of thing.
you didnt, for instance, find it mind-witheringly, explosively, astoundingly,
blisteringly dull?
well, er, no. not as such. not actually blisteringly.
odd. i would.
well, i suppose we have a different outlook.
yes.
like the pikka birds.
ford had no idea what he was talking about and couldnt be bothered to ask.
instead he said, so how the hell do we get out of this place?
well i think the simplest way from here is just to follow the way down the
valley to the plains, probably take an hour, and then walk round from there.
i dont think i could face going back up and over the way i came.
walk round where from there?
well, back to the village. i suppose. arthur sighed a little forlornly.
i dont want to go to any blasted village! snapped ford.

137

weve got to get out of here!
where? how?
i dont know, you tell me. you live here! there must be some way off this
zarking planet.
i dont know. what do you usually do? sit around and wait for a passing
spacecraft, i suppose.
oh yes? and how many spacecraft have visited this zark- forsaken little
fleapit recently?
well, a few years ago there was mine that crashed here by mistake. then
there was, er, trillian, then the parcel delivery, and now you, and...
yes, but apart from the usual suspects?
well, er, i think pretty much none, so far as i know. pretty quiet round
here.
as if deliberately to prove him wrong, there was a long, low distant roll of
thunder.
ford leapt to his feet fretfully and started pacing backwards and forwards in
the feeble, painful light of the early dawn which lay streaked against the sky
as if someone had dragged a piece of liver across it.
you dont understand how important this is, he said.
what? you mean my daughter out there all alone in the galaxy? you think
i dont...
can we feel sorry for the galaxy later? said ford. this is very, very serious
indeed. the guide has been taken over. its been bought out.
arthur leapt up. oh very serious, he shouted. please fill me in straight
away on some corporate publishing politics!
i cant tell you how much its
been on my mind of late!
you dont understand! theres a whole new guide!
oh! shouted arthur again. oh! oh! oh! im incoherent with excitement!
i can hardly wait for it to come out to find out which are the most exciting
spaceports to get bored hanging about in in some globular cluster ive never
heard of. please, can we rush to a store thats got it right this very instant?
ford narrowed his eyes.
this is that thing you call sarcasm, isnt it?
do you know, bellowed arthur, i think it is? i really think it might just
be a crazy little thing called sarcasm seeping in at the edges of my manner of
speech! ford, i have had a fucking bad night! will you please try and take
that into account while you consider what fascinating bits of badger-sputumly
inconsequential trivia to assail me with next?
try to rest, said ford. i need to think.
why do you need to think? cant we just sit and go budum- budumbudum

138

chapter 19.

with our lips for a bit? couldnt we just dribble gently and loll a little bit
to the left for a few minutes? i cant stand it, ford! i cant stand all this
thinking and trying to work things out any more. you may think that i am
just standing here barking...
hadnt occurred to me in fact.
...but i mean it! what is the point? we assume that every time we do any-
thing we know what the consequences will be, i.e., more or less what we intend
them to be. this is not only not always correct. it is wildly, crazily, stupidly
cross-eyed-blithering-insectly wrong!
which is exactly my point.
thank you, said arthur, sitting down again. what?
temporal reverse engineering.
arthur put his head in his hands and shook it gently from side to side.
is there any humane way, he moaned, in which i can prevent you from
telling me what temporary reverse bloody-whatsiting is?
no, said ford, because your daughter is caught up in the middle of it and
it is deadly, deadly serious.
thunder rolled in the pause.
all right, said arthur. tell me.
i leaped out of a high-rise office window.
this cheered arthur up.
oh! he said. why dont you do it again?
i did.
hmmm, said arthur, disappointed. obviously no good came of it.
the first time i managed to save myself by the most astonish- ing and - i say
this in all modesty - fabulous piece of ingenious quick-thinking, agility, fancy
footwork and self-sacrifice.
what was the self-sacrifice?
i jettisoned half of a much loved and i think irreplaceable pair of shoes.
why was that self-sacrifice?
because they were mine! said ford crossly.
i think we have different value systems.
well mines better.
thats according to your... oh never mind. so having saved yourself very
cleverly once you very sensibly went and jumped again. please dont tell me
why. just tell me what happened if you must.
i fell straight into the open cockpit of a passing jet towncar whose pilot had
just accidentally pushed the eject button when he meant only to change tracks
on the stereo. now, even i couldnt think that that was particularly clever of
me.

139

its a lethal little thing. looks pretty, talks big, collapses waveforms

oh, i dont know, said arthur wearily. i expect you probably sneaked into
his jetcar the previous night and set the pilots least favourite track to play or
something.
no, i didnt, said ford.
just checking.
though oddly enough, somebody else did. and this is the nub. you could
trace the chain and branches of crucial events and coincidences back and back.
turned out the new guide had done it. that bird.
what bird?
you havent seen it?
no.
oh.
selectively at will.
what does that mean?
temporal reverse engineering.
oh, said arthur. oh yes.
the question is, who is it really doing it for?
ive actually got a sandwich in my pocket, said arthur, delving. would
you like a bit?
yeah, ok.
its a bit squished and sodden, im afraid.
never mind.
they munched for a bit.
its quite good in fact, said ford. whats the meat in it?
perfectly normal beast.
not come across that one. so, the question is, ford con- tinued, who is the
bird really doing it for? whats the real game here?
mmm, ate arthur.
when i found the bird, continued ford, which i did by a series of coinci-
dences that are interesting in themselves, it put on the most fantastic multi-
dimensional display of pyrotechnics ive ever seen. it then said that it would
put its services at my disposal in my universe. i said, thanks but no thanks.
it said that it would anyway, whether i liked it or not. i said just try it, and
it said it would and, indeed, already had done. i said wed see about that and
it said that we would. thats when i decided to pack the thing up and get it
out of there. so i sent it to you for safety.
oh yes? whose?
never you mind. then, what with one thing and another, i thought it pru-
dent to jump out of the window again, being fresh out of other options at the
time. luckily for me the jetcar was there otherwise i would have had to fall

140

chapter 19.

back on ingenious quick-thinking, agility, maybe another shoe or, failing all
else, the ground. but it meant that, whether i liked it or not, the guide was,
well, working for me, and that was deeply worrying.
why?
because if youve got the guide you think that you are the one its working
for. everything went swimmingly smoothly for me from then on, up to the
very moment that i come up against the totty with the rock, then, bang, im
history. im out of the loop.
are you referring to my daughter?
as politely as i can. shes the next one in the chain who will think that
everything is going fabulously for her. she can beat whoever she likes around
the head with bits of the landscape, everything will just swim for her until
shes done whatever shes supposed to do and then it will be all up for her
too. its reverse temporal engineering, and clearly nobody understood what
was being unleashed!
like me for instance.
what? oh, wake up, arthur. look, let me try it again. the new guide came
out of the research labs. it made use of this new technology of unfiltered per-
ception. do you know what that means?
look, ive been making sandwiches for bobs sake!
whos bob?
never mind. just carry on.
unfiltered perception means it perceives everything. got that? i dont per-
ceive everything. you dont perceive everything. we have filters. the new
guide doesnt have any sense filters. it perceives everything. it wasnt a com-
plicated technological idea. it was just a question of leaving a bit out. got
it?
why dont i just say that ive got it, and then you can carry on regardless.
right. now because the bird can perceive every possible universe.
it is
present in every possible universe. yes?
y... e... e... s. ish.
so what happens is, the bozos in the marketing and account- ing depart-
ments say, oh that sounds good, doesnt that mean we only have to make one
of them and then sell it an infinite number of times? dont squint at me like
that, arthur, this is how accountants think!
thats quite clever, isnt it?
no! it is fantastically stupid. look. the machines only a little guide. its
got some quite clever cybertechnology in it, but because it has unfiltered per-
ception, any smallest move it makes has the power of a virus. it can propagate
throughout space, time and a million other dimensions. anything can be fo-

141

cused anywhere in any of the universes that you and i move in.
its power
is recursive. think of a computer program. somewhere, there is one key
instruction, and everything else is just functions calling themselves, or brack-
ets billowing out endlessly through an infinite address space. what happens
when the brackets collapse? wheres the final end if? is any of this making
sense? arthur?
sorry, i was nodding off for a moment. something about the universe, yes?
something about the universe, yes, said ford, wearily. he sat down again.
all right, he said. think about this. you know who i think i saw at the
guide offices? vogons. ah. i see ive said a word you understand at last.
arthur leapt to his feet.
that noise, he said.
what noise?
the thunder.
what about it?
it isnt thunder. its the spring migration of the perfectly normal beasts.
its started.
what are these animals you keep on about?
i dont keep on about them. i just put bits of them in sandwiches.
why are they called perfectly normal beasts?
arthur told him.
it wasnt often that arthur had the pleasure of seeing fords eyes open wide
with astonishment.

142

chapter 19.



it was a sight that arthur never quite got used to, or tired of. he and ford
had tracked their way swiftly along the side of the small river that flowed
down along the bed of the valley, and when at last they reached the margin of
the plains they pulled themselves up into the branches of a large tree to get a
better view of one of the stranger and more wonderful visions that the galaxy
has to offer.
the great thunderous herd of thousand upon thousand of perfectly normal
beasts was sweeping in magnificent array across the anhondo plain. in the
early pale light of the morning, as the great animals charged through the fine
steam of the sweat of their bodies mingled with the muddy mist churned up
by their pounding hooves, their appearance seemed a little unreal and ghostly
anyway, but what was heart-stopping about them was where they came from
and where they went to, which appeared to be, simply, nowhere.
they formed a solid, charging phalanx roughly a hundred yards wide and half
a mile long. the phalanx never moved, except that it exhibited a slight grad-
ual drift sideways and backwards for the eight or nine days that it regularly
appeared for. but though the phalanx stayed more or less constant, the great
beasts of which it was composed charged steadily at upwards of twenty miles
an hour, appearing suddenly from thin air at one end of the plain, and disap-
pearing equally abruptly at the other end.
no one knew where they came from, no one knew where they went. they
were so important to the lives of the lamuellans, it was almost as if nobody
liked to ask. old thrashbarg had said on one occasion that some times if you
received an answer, the question might be taken away. some of the villagers
had privately said that this was the only properly wise thing theyd ever heard
thrashbarg say, and after a short debate on the matter, had put it down to
chance.
the noise of the pounding of the hooves was so intense that it was hard to144

chapter 20.

hear anything else above it.
what did you say? shouted arthur.
i said, shouted ford, this looks like it might be some kind of evidence of
dimensional drift.
which is what? shouted arthur back.
well, a lot of people are beginning to worry that space/time is showing signs
of cracking up with everything thats happening to it. there are quite a lot
of worlds where you can see how the landmasses have cracked up and moved
around just from the weirdly long or meandering routes that migrating animals
take. this might be something like that. we live in twisted times. still, in
the absence of a decent spaceport...
arthur looked at him in a kind of frozen way.
what do you mean? he said.
what do you mean, what do i mean? shouted ford. you know perfectly
well what i mean. were going to ride our way out of here.
are you seriously suggesting we try to ride a perfectly normal beast?
yeah. see where it goes to.
well be killed! no, said arthur, suddenly. we wont be killed. at least i
wont. ford, have you ever heard of a planet called stavromula beta?
ford frowned. dont think so, he said. he pulled out his own battered old
copy of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy and accessed it. any funny
spelling? he said.
dont know. ive only ever heard it said, and that was by someone who had
a mouthful of other peoples teeth. you remember i told you about agrajag?
ford thought for a moment. you mean the guy who was convinced you were
getting him killed over and over again?
yes. one of the places he claimed id got him killed was stavromula beta.
someone tries to shoot me, it seems. i duck and agrajag, or at least, one of
his many reincarnations, gets hit. it seems that this has definitely happened
at some point in time so, i suppose, i cant get killed at least until after ive
ducked on stavromula beta. only no ones ever heard of it.
hmm. ford tried a few other searches of the hitch hikers guide, but drew
a blank.
nothing, he said.
i was just... no, ive never heard of it, said ford finally. he wondered why
it was ringing a very, very faint bell, though.
ok, said arthur. ive seen the way the lamuellan hunters trap perfectly
normal beasts. if you spear one in the herd it just gets trampled, so they have
to lure them out one at a time for the kill. its very like the way a matador
works, you know, with a brightly coloured cape. you get one to charge at you

and then step aside and execute a rather elegant swing through with the cape.
have you got anything like a brightly coloured cape about you?
this do? said ford, handing him his towel.146

chapter 20.



leaping on to the back of a one-and-a-half-ton perfectly normal beast migrat-
ing through your world at a thundering thirty miles an hour is not as easy as
it might at first seem. certainly it is not as easy as the lamuellan hunters
made it seem, and arthur dent was prepared to discover that this might turn
out to be the difficult bit.
what he hadnt been prepared to discover, however, was how difficult it was
even getting to the difficult bit. it was the bit that was supposed to be the
easy bit which turned out to be practically impossible.
they couldnt even catch the attention of a single animal. the perfectly nor-
mal beasts were so intent on working up a good thunder with their hooves,
heads down shoulders forward, back legs pounding the ground into porridge
that it would have taken something not merely startling but actually geological
to disturb them.
the sheer amount of thundering and pending was, in the end, more than
arthur and ford could deal with. after they had spent nearly two hours
prancing about doing increasingly foolish things with a medium-sized floral
patterned bath towel, they had not managed to get even one of the great
beasts thundering and pounding past them to do so much as glance casually
in their direction.
they were within three feet of the horizontal avalanche of sweating bodies.
to have been much nearer would have been to risk instant death, chrono-logic
or no chrono-logic. arthur had seen what remained of any perfectly normal
beast which, as the result of a clumsy mis-throw by a young and inexperienced
lamuellan hunter, got speared while still thundering and pound- ing with the
herd.
one stumble was all it took. no prior appointment with death on stavromula
beta, wherever the hell stavromula beta was, would save you or anybody else
from the thunderous, mangling pounding of those hooves.148

chapter 21.

at last, arthur and ford staggered back. they sat down, exhausted and de-
feated, and started to criticise each others technique with the towel.
youve got to flick it more, complained ford. you need more follow-through
from the elbow if youre going to get those blasted creatures to notice anything
at all.
follow-through? protested arthur. you need more supple- ness in the
wrist.
you need more after-flourish, countered ford.
you need a bigger towel.
you need, said another voice, a pikka bird.
you what?
the voice had come from behind them. they turned, and there, standing
behind them in the early morning sun, was old thrashbarg.
to attract the attention of a perfectly normal beast, he said, as he walked
forward towards them, you need a pikka bird. like this.
from under the rough, cassocky robe-like thing he wore he drew a small pikka
bird. it sat restlessly on old thrashbargs hand and peered intently at bob
knows what darting around about three feet six inches in front of it.
ford instantly went into the sort of alert crouch he liked to do when he wasnt
quite sure what was going on or what he ought to do about it. he waved his
arms around very slowly in what he hoped was an ominous manner.
who is this? he hissed.
its just old thrashbarg, said arthur quietly. and i wouldnt bother with
all the fancy movements. hes just as experienced a bluffer as you are. you
could end up dancing around each other all day.
the bird, hissed ford again. whats the bird?
its just a bird! said arthur impatiently. its like any other bird. it lays
eggs and goes ark at things you cant see. or kar or rit or something.
have you seen one lay eggs? said ford, suspiciously.
for heavens sake of course i have, said arthur. and ive eaten hundreds
of them. make rather a good omelette. the secret is little cubes of cold butter
and then whipping it lightly with...
i dont want a zarking recipe, said ford. i just want to be sure its a real
bird and not some kind of multi-dimensional cybernightmare.
he slowly stood up from his crouched position and started to brush himself
down. he was still watching the bird, though.
so, said old thrashbarg to arthur. is it written that bob shall once more
take back unto himself the benediction of his once-given sandwich maker?
ford almost went back into his crouch.
its all right, muttered arthur, he always talks like that. aloud, he said,

149

ah, venerable thrashbarg. um, yes. im afraid i think im going to have
to be popping off now. but young drimple, my apprentice, will be a fine
sandwich maker in my stead. he has the aptitude, a deep love of sandwiches,
and the skills he has acquired so far, though rudimentary as yet, will, in time
mature and, er, well, i think hell work out ok is what im trying to say.
old thrashbarg regarded him gravely. his old grey eyes moved sadly. he held
his arms aloft, one still carrying a bobbing pikka bird, the other his staff.
o sandwich maker from bob! he pronounced. he paused, furrowed his
brow, and sighed as he closed his eyes in pious contemplation. life, he said,
will be a very great deal less weird without you!
arthur was stunned.
do you know, he said, i think thats the nicest thing any- bodys ever said
to me?
can we get on, please? said ford.
something was already happening. the presence of the pikka bird at the end
of thrashbargs outstretched arm was sending tremors of interest through the
thundering herd. the odd head flicked momentarily in their direction. arthur
began to remem- ber some of the perfectly normal beast hunts he had wit-
nessed. he recalled that as well as the hunter-matadors brandishing their capes
there were always others standing behind them holding pikka birds. he had
always assumed that, like him, they had just come along to watch.
old thrashbarg moved forward, a little closer to the rolling herd. some of
the beasts were now tossing their heads back with interest at the sight of the
pikka bird.
old thrashbargs outstretched arms were trembling.
only the pikka bird itself seemed to show no interest in what was going on. a
few anonymous molecules of air nowhere in particular engaged all of its perky
attention.
now! exclaimed old thrashbarg at last. now you may work them with
the towel!
arthur advanced with fords towel, moving the way the hunter-matadors did,
with a kind of elegant strut that did not come at all naturally to him. but
now he knew what to do and that it was right. he brandished and flicked the
towel a few times, to be ready for the moment, and then he watched.
some distance away he spotted the beast he wanted. head down, it was gallop-
ing towards him, right on the very edge of the herd. old thrashbarg switched
the bird, the beast looked up, tossed its head, and then, just as its head was
coming down again, arthur flourished the towel in the beasts line of sight. it
tossed its head again in bemusement, and its eyes followed the movement of
the towel.

150

chapter 21.

he had got the beasts attention.
from that moment on, it seemed the most natural thing to coax and draw
the animal towards him. its head was up, cocked slightly to one side. it was
slowing to a canter and then a trot. a few seconds later the huge thing was
standing there amongst them, snorting, panting, sweating, and sniffing excit-
edly at the pikka bird, which appeared not to have noticed its arrival at all.
with strange sort of sweeping movements of his arms old thrashbarg kept
the pikka bird in front of the beast, but always out of its reach and always
downwards. with strange sort of sweeping movements of the towel, arthur
kept drawing the beasts attention this way and that - always downwards.
i dont think ive ever seen anything quite so stupid in my life, muttered
ford to himself.
at last, the beast dropped, bemused but docile, to its knees.
go! whispered old thrashbarg urgently, to ford. go! go now!
ford leapt up on to the great creatures back, scrabbling amongst its thick
knotty fur for purchase, grasping great handfuls of the stuff to hold him steady
once he was in position.
now, sandwich maker! go! he performed some elaborate sign and ritual
handshake which arthur couldnt quite get the hang of because old thrash-
barg had obviously made it up on the spur of the moment, then he pushed
arthur forward. taking a deep breath, he clambered up behind ford on to
the great, hot, heaving back of the beast and held on tight. huge muscles the
size of sea lions rippled and flexed beneath him.
old thrashbarg held the bird suddenly aloft. the beasts head swivelled up
to follow it. thrashbarg pushed upwards and upwards repeatedly with his
arms and with the pikka bird; and slowly, heavily the perfectly normal beast
lurched up off its knees and stood, at last, swaying slightly. its two riders held
on fiercely and nervously.
arthur gazed out over the sea of hurtling animals, straining in an attempt to
see where it was they were going, but there was nothing but heat haze.
can you see anything? he said to ford.
no. ford twisted round to glance back, trying to see if there was any clue
as to where they had come from. still, nothing.
arthur shouted down at thrashbarg.
do you know where they come from? he called. or where theyre going?
the domain of the king! shouted old thrashbarg back.
king? shouted arthur in surprise. what king? the per- fectly normal
beast was swaying and rocking restlessly under him.
what do you mean, what king? shouted old thrashbarg. the king.
its just that you never mentioned a king, shouted arthur back, in some

151

consternation.
what? shouted old thrashbarg. the thrumming of a thou- sand hooves
was very hard to hear over, and the old man was concentrating on what he
was doing.
still holding the bird aloft, he led the beast slowly round till it was once more
parallel with the motion of its great herd. he moved forward. the beast fol-
lowed. he moved forward again. the beast followed again. at last, the beast
was lumbering for- ward with a little momentum.
i said you never mentioned a king! shouted arthur again.
i didnt say a king, shouted old thrashbarg, i said the king.
he drew back his arm and then hurled it forward with all his strength, casting
the pikka bird up into the air above the herd. this seemed to catch the pikka
bird completely by surprise as it had obviously not been paying any attention
at all to what was going on. it took it a moment or two to work out what was
happening, then it unfurled its little wings, spread them out, and flew.
go! shouted thrashbarg. go and meet your destiny, sand- wich maker!
arthur wasnt so sure about wanting to meet his destiny as such. he just
wanted to get to wherever it was they were going so he could get back off this
creature again. he didnt feel at all safe up there. the beast was gathering
speed as it followed in the wake of the pikka bird. and then it was in at the
fringes of the great tide of animals, and in a moment or two, with its head
down, the pikka bird forgotten, it was running with the herd again and rapidly
approaching the point at which the herd was vanishing into thin air. arthur
and ford held on to the great monster for dear life, surrounded on all sides by
hurtling mountains of bodies.
go! ride that beast! shouted thrashbarg. his distant voice reverberated
faintly in their ears. ride that perfectly normal beast! ride it, ride it!
ford shouted in arthurs ear, where did he say we were going?
he said something about a king, shouted arthur in return, holding on des-
perately.
what king?
thats what i said. he just said the king.
i didnt know there was a the king, shouted ford.
nor did i, shouted arthur back.
except of course for the king, shouted ford. and i dont suppose he meant
him.
what king? shouted arthur.
the point of exit was almost upon them. just ahead of them, perfectly normal
beasts were galloping into nothingness and vanishing.
what do you mean, what king? shouted ford. i dont know what king.

152

chapter 21.

im only saying that he couldnt possibly mean the king, so i dont know what
he means.
ford, i dont know what youre talking about.
so? said ford. then with a sudden rush, the stars came on, turned and
twisted around their heads, and then, just as suddenly, turned off again.



misty grey buildings loomed and flickered. they bounced up and down in a
highly embarrassing way.
what sort of buildings were they?
what were they for? what did they remind her of?
its so difficult to know what things are supposed to be when you suddenly
turn up unexpectedly on a different world which has a different culture, a
different set of the most basic assumptions about life, and also incredibly dull
and meaningless architecture.
the sky above the buildings was a cold and hostile black. the stars, which
should have been blindingly brilliant points of light this far from the sun were
blurred and dulled by the thickness of the huge shielding bubble. perspex or
something like it. something dull and heavy anyway.
tricia wound the tape back again to the beginning.
she knew there was something slightly odd about it.
well, in fact, there were about a million things that were slightly odd about
it, but there was one that was nagging at her and she hadnt quite got it.
she sighed and yawned.
as she waited for the tape to rewind she cleared away some of the dirty
polystyrene coffee cups that had accumulated on the editing desk and tipped
them into the bin.
she was sitting in a small editing suite at a video production company in soho.
she had do not disturb notices plastered all over the door, and a block on
all incoming calls at the switch- board. this was originally to protect her
astonishing scoop, but now it was to protect her from embarrassment.
she would watch the tape all the way through again from the beginning. if
she could bear to. she might do some fast forwarding here and there.
it was about four oclock on monday afternoon, and she had a kind of sick
feeling. she was trying to work out what the cause of this slightly sick feeling154

chapter 22.

was, and there was no shortage of candidates.
first of all, it had all come on top of the overnight flight from new york. the
red eye. always a killer, that.
then, being accosted by aliens on her lawn and flown to the planet rupert.
she was not sufficiently experienced in that sort of thing to be able to say for
sure that that was always a killer, but she would be prepared to bet that those
who went through it regularly cursed it. there were always stress charts being
published in magazines. fifty stress points for losing your job. seventy-five
points for a divorce or changing your hairstyle and so on. none of them ever
mentioned being accosted on your lawn by aliens and then being flown to the
planet rupert, but she was sure it was worth a few dozen points.
it wasnt that the journey had been particularly stressful.
it had been ex-
tremely dull in fact. certainly it had been no more stressful than the trip she
had just taken across the atlantic and it had taken roughly the same time,
about seven hours.
well that was pretty astounding wasnt it? flying to the outer limits of the
solar system in the same time that it took to fly to new york meant they must
have some fantastic unheard-of form of propulsion in the ship. she quizzed
her hosts about it and they agreed that it was pretty good.
but how does it work? she had demanded excitedly. she was still quite
excited at the beginning of the trip.
she found that part of the tape and played it through to herself. the gre-
bulons, which is what they called themselves, were politely showing her which
buttons they pressed to make the ship go.
yes, but what principle does it work on? she heard herself demand, from
behind the camera.
oh, you mean is it something like a warp drive or something like that? they
said.
yes, persisted tricia. what is it?
it probably is something of the kind, they said.
like what?
warp drive, photon drive, something like that. youd have to ask the flight
engineer.
which one is he?
we dont know. we have all lost our minds, you see.
oh yes, said tricia, a little faintly. so you said. um, how did you lose your
minds, exactly , then?.
we dont know, they said, patiently.
because youve lost your minds, echoed tricia, glumly.
would you like to watch television? it is a long flight. we watch television.

155

it is something we enjoy.
all of this riveting stuff was on the tape, and fine. viewing it made. first of
all the picture quality was extremely poor. tricia didnt know why this was,
exactly. she had a feeling that the grebulons responded to a slightly different
range of light frequencies, and that there had been a lot of ultra-violet around
which was mucking up the video camera. there were a lot of interference pat-
terns and video snow as well. probably something to do with the warp drive
that none of them knew the first thing about.
so what she had on tape, essentially, was a bunch of slightly thin and dis-
coloured people sitting around watching televisions that were showing network
broadcasts. she had also pointed the camera out of the very tiny viewport near
her seat and got a nice, slightly streaky effect of stars. she knew it was real,
but it would have taken a good three or four minutes to fake.
in the end she had decided to save her precious videotape for rupert itself and
had simply sat back and watched television with them. she had even dozed
off for a while.
so part of her sick feeling came from the sense that she had had all that time
in an alien spacecraft of astounding technological design, and had spent most
of it dozing in front of reruns of m*a*s*h and cagney and lacey. but what
else was there to do? she had taken some photos as well, of course, all of which
had subsequently turned out to be badly fogged when she got them back from
the chemist.
another part of her sick feeling probably came from the landing on rupert.
this at least had been dramatic and hair-raising. the ship had come sweeping
in over a dark and sombre landscape, a terrain so desperately far removed
from the heat and light of its parent sun that it seemed like a map of the
psychological scars on the mind of an abandoned child.
lights blazed through the frozen darkness and guided the ship into the mouth
of some kind of cave that seemed to bend itself open to accept the small craft.
unfortunately, because of the angle of their approach, and the depth at which
the small thick viewport was set into the crafts skin, it hadnt been possible
to get the. video camera to point directly at any of it. she ran through that
bit of the tape.
the camera was pointing directly at the sun.
this is normally very bad for a video camera. but when the sun is roughly a
third of a billion miles away it doesnt do any harm. in fact it hardly makes
any impression at all. you just get a small point of light right in the middle
of the frame, which could be just about anything. it was just one star in a
multitude.
tricia fast-forwarded.

156

chapter 22.

ah. now, the next bit had been quite promising. they had emerged out of the
ship into a vast, grey, hangar-like structure. this was clearly alien technology
on a dramatic scale. huge grey buildings under the dark canopy of the perspex
bubble. these were the same buildings that she had been looking at at the
end of the tape. she had taken more footage of them while leaving rupert a
few hours later, just as she was about to reboard the spacecraft for the journey
home. what did they remind her of?
well, as much as anything else they reminded her of a film set from just
about any low-budget science-fiction movie of the last twenty years. a lot
larger, of course, but it all looked thoroughly tawdry and unconvincing on the
video screen. apart from the dreadful picture quality she had been struggling
with the unexpected effects of gravity that was appreciably lower than that
on earth, and she had found it very hard to keep the camera from bouncing
around in an embarrassingly unprofessional way. it was therefore impossible
to make out any detail.
and now here was the leader coming forward to greet her, smiling and sticking
his hand out.
that was all he was called. the leader.
none of the grebulons had names, largely because they couldnt think of
any. tricia discovered that some of them had thought of calling themselves
after characters from television programmes they had picked up from earth,
but hard as they had tried to call each other wayne and bobby and chuck,
some remnant of something lurking deep in the cultural subconscious they had
brought with them from the distant stars which were their homes must have
told them that this really wasnt right and wouldnt do.
the leader had looked pretty much like all the others. possibly a bit less
thin. he said how much he enjoyed her shows on tv, that he was her greatest
fan, how glad he was that she had been able to come along and visit them
on rupert and how much everybody had been looking forward to her coming,
how he hoped the flight had been comfortable and so on. there was no par-
ticular sense she could detect of being any kind of emissary from the stars or
anything.
certainly, watching it now on videotape, he just looked like some guy in cos-
tume and make-up, standing in front of a set that wouldnt hold up too well
if you leant against it.
she sat staring at the screen with her face cradled in her hands, and shaking
her head in slow bewilderment.
this was awful.
not only was this bit awful but she knew what was coming next. it was the
bit where the leader asked if she was hungry after the flight, and would she

157

perhaps like to come and have something to eat? they could discuss things
over a little dinner.
she could remember what she was thinking at this point.
alien food.
how was she going to deal with it?
would she actually have to eat it? would she have access to some sort of paper
napkin she could spit stuff out into? wouldnt there be all sorts of differential
immunity problems?
it turned out to be hamburgers.
not only did it turn out to be hamburgers, but the hamburgers it turned out
to be were very clearly and obviously mcdonalds hamburgers which had been
reheated in a microwave. it wasnt just the look of them. it wasnt just the
smell.
it was the poly- styrene clamshell packages they came in which had
mcdonalds printed all over them.
eat! enjoy! said the leader. nothing is too good for our honoured guest!
this was in his private apartment. tricia had looked around it in bewilder-
ment that had bordered on fear but had nevertheless got it all on videotape.
the apartment had a waterbed in it. and a midi hi-fi. and one of those
tall electrically illuminated glass things which sit on table tops and appear to
have large globules of sperm floating about in them. the walls were covered
in velvet.
the leader lounged against a brown corduroy bean bag and squirted breath-
freshener into his mouth.
tricia began to feel very scared, suddenly. she was further from earth than
any human being, to her knowledge, had ever been, and she was with an alien
creature, who was lounging against a brown corduroy bean bag and squirting
breath-freshener into his mouth.
she didnt want to make any false moves. she didnt want to alarm him. but
there were things she had to know.
how did you... where did you get... this? she asked, gesturing around the
room, nervously.
the decor? asked the leader. do you like it? it is very sophisticated.
we are a sophisticated people, we grebulons. we buy sophisticated consumer
durables... by mail order.
tricia had nodded tremendously slowly at this point.
mail order... she had said.
the leader chuckled. it was one of those dark chocolate reassuring silky chuck-
les.
i think you think they ship it here. no! ha ha! we have arranged a special
box number in new hampshire. we make regular pick-up visits. ha ha!

158

chapter 22.

he lounged back in a relaxed fashion on his bean bag, reached for a reheated
french fry and nibbled the end of it, an amused smile playing across. his lips.
tricia could feel her brain beginning to bubble very slightly. she kept the
video camera going.
how do you, well, er, how do you pay for these wonderful ...things?
the leader chuckled again.
american express, he said with a nonchalant shrug.
tricia nodded slowly again. she knew that they gave cards exclusively to just
about anybody.
and these? she said, holding up the hamburger he had presented her with.
it is very easy, said the leader. we stand in line.
again, tricia realised with a cold, trickling feeling going down her spine, that
explained an awful lot.

she hit the fast forward button again. there was nothing of any use here
at all. it was all nightmarish madness. she could have faked something that
would have looked more convincing.
another sick feeling began to creep over her as she watched this hopeless awful
tape, and she began, with slow horror, to realise that it must be the answer.
she must be...
she shook her head and tried to get a grip.
an overnight flight going east... the sleeping pills she had taken to get her
through it. the vodka shed had to set the sleeping pills going.
what else? well. there was seventeen years of obsession that a glamorous
man with two heads, one of which was disguised as a parrot in a cage, had
tried to pick her up at a party but had then impatiently flown off to another
planet in a flying saucer. there suddenly seemed to be all sorts of bothersome
aspects to that idea that had never really occurred to her. never occurred to
her. in seventeen years.
she stuffed her fist into her mouth.
she must get help.
then there had been eric bartlett banging on about alien spacecraft landing
on her lawn. and before that... new york had been, well, very hot and stress-
ful. the high hopes and the bitter disappointment. the astrology stuff.
she must have had a nervous breakdown.
that was it. she was exhausted and she had had a nervous breakdown and
had started hallucinating some time after she got home. she had dreamt the
whole story. an alien race of people dispossessed of their own lives and his-
tories, stuck on a remote outpost of our solar system and filling their cultural
vacuum with our cultural junk. ha! it was natures way of telling her to check

159

into an expensive medical establishment very quickly.
she was very, very sick. she looked at how many large coffees shed got through
as well, and realised how heavily she was breathing and how fast.
part of solving any problem, she told herself, was realising that you had it.
she started to bring her breathing under control. she had caught herself in
time. she had seen where she was. she was on the way back from whatever
psychological precipice she had been on the brink of. she started to calm
down, to calm down, to calm down. she sat back in the chair and closed her
eyes.
after a while, now that she was breathing normally again, she opened them
again.
so where had she got this tape from then?
it was still running.
all right. it was a fake.
she had faked it herself, that was it.
it must have been her who had faked it because her voice was all over the
soundtrack, asking questions. every now and then the camera would swing
down at the end of a shot and she would see her own feet in her own shoes.
she had faked it and she had no recollection of faking it or any idea of why
she had done it.
her breathing was getting hectic again as she watched the snowy, flickering
screen.
she must still be hallucinating.
she shook her head, trying to make it go away. she had no memory of faking
any of this very obviously fake stuff. on the other hand she did seem to have
memories that were very like the faked stuff. she continued to watch in a
bewildered trance.
the person she imagined to be called the leader was ques- tioning her about
astrology and she was answering smoothly and calmly. only she could detect
the well-disguised rising panic in her own voice.
the leader pushed a button, and a maroon velvet wall slid aside, revealing a
large bank of flat tv monitors.
each of the monitors was showing a kaleidoscope of different images: a few
seconds from a game show, a few seconds from a cop show, a few seconds from
a supermarket warehouse security system, a few seconds from somebodys hol-
iday movies, a few seconds of sex, a few seconds of news, a few seconds of
comedy. it was clear that the leader was very proud of all this stuff and he
was waving his hands like a conductor while continuing at the same time to
talk complete gibberish.
another wave of his hands, and all the screens cleared to form one giant com-

160

chapter 22.

puter screen showing in diagrammatic form all the planets of the solar system
and mapped out against a background of the stars in their constellations. the
display was completely static.
we have great skills, the leader was saying. great skills in computation, in
cosmological trigonometry, in three-dimensional navigational calculus. great
skills. great, great skills. only we have lost them. it is too bad. we like
to have skills only they have gone. they are in space somewhere, hurtling.
with our names and the details of our homes and loved ones. please, he said,
gesturing her forward to sit at the computers console, be skilful for us.
obviously what happened next was that tricia quickly set the video camera
up on its tripod to capture the whole scene. she then walked into shot herself
and sat down calmly in front of the giant computer display, spent a few mo-
ments familiarising herself with the interface and then started smoothly and
com- petently to pretend that she had the faintest idea what she was doing.
it hadnt been that difficult, in fact.
she was, after all, a mathematician and astrophysicist by training and a tele-
vision presenter by experience, and what science she had forgotten over the
years she was more than capable of making up by bluffing.
the computer she was working on was clear evidence that the grebulons came
from a far more advanced and sophisticated culture than their current vacuous
state suggested, and with its aid she was able, within about half an hour, to
cobble together a rough working model of the solar system.
it wasnt particularly accurate or anything, but it looked good. the planets
were whizzing around in reasonably good simulations of their orbits, and you
could watch the movement of the whole piece of virtual cosmological clock-
work from any point within the system - very roughly. you could watch from
earth, you could watch from mars, etc. you could watch from the surface of
the planet rupert. tricia had been quite impressed with herself, but also very
impressed with the computer system she was working on. using a computer
workstation on earth the task would probably have taken a year or so of pro-
gramming.
when she was finished, the leader came up behind her and watched. he was
very pleased and delighted with what she had achieved.
good, he said. and now, please, i would like you to demonstrate how to
use the system you have just designed to translate the information in this book
for me.
quietly he put a book down in front of her.
it was you and your planets by gail andrews.

tricia stopped the tape again.

161

she was definitely feeling very wobbly indeed. the feeling that she was hal-
lucinating had now receded, but had not left anything any easier or clearer in
her head.
she pushed her seat back from the editing desk and wondered what to do.
years ago she had left the field of astronomical research because she knew,
without any doubt whatsoever, that she had met a being from another planet.
at a par- ty. and she had also known, without any doubt whatsoever, that
she would have made herself a laughing stock if she had ever said so. but
how could she study cosmology and not say anything about the single most
important thing she knew about it? she had done the only thing she could
do. she had left.
now she worked in television and the same thing had happened again.
she had videotape, actual videotape of the most astounding story in the his-
tory of, well anything: a forgotten outpost of an alien civilisation marooned
on the outermost planet of our own solar system.
she had the story.
she had been there.
she had seen it.
she had the videotape for gods sake.
and if she ever showed it to anybody, she would be a laughing stock.

how could she prove any of this? it wasnt even worth thinking about.
the whole thing was a nightmare from virtually any angle she cared to look
at it from. her head was beginning to throb.
she had some aspirin in her bag. she went out of the little editing suite to
the water dispenser down the corridor. she took the aspirin and drank several
cups of water.
the place seemed to be very quiet. usually there were more people bustling
about the place, or at least some people bustling around the place. she popped
her head round the door of the editing suite next to hers but there was no one
there.
she had gone rather overboard keeping people out of her own suite. do not
disturb, the notice read. do not even think of entering. i
dont care what it is. go away. im busy!
when she went back in she noticed that the message light on her phone ex-
tension was winking, and wondered how long it had been on.
hello? she said to the receptionist.
oh, miss mcmillan, im so glad you called. everybodys been trying to reach
you. your tv company. theyre desperate to reach you. can you call them?
why didnt you put them through? said tricia.

162

chapter 22.

you said i wasnt to put anybody through for anything. you said i was to
deny that you were even here. i didnt know what to do. i came up to give
you a message, but...
ok, said tricia, cursing herself. she phoned her office.
tricia! where the haemorrhaging fuck are you?
at the editing...
they said...
i know. whats up?
whats up? only a bloody alien spaceship!
what? where?
regents park. big silver job. some girl with a bird. she speaks english and
throws rocks at people and wants someone to repair her watch. just get there.

tricia stared at it.

it wasnt a grebulon ship. not that she was suddenly an expert on extrater-
restrial craft, but this was a sleek and beautiful silver and white thing about
the size of a large ocean-going yacht, which is what it most resembled. next to
this, the structures of the huge half-dismantled grebulon ship looked like gun
turrets on a battleship. gun turrets. thats what those blank grey buildings
had looked like. and what was odd about them was that by the time she
passed them again on her way to reboarding the small grebulon craft, they
had moved. these things flitted briefly through her head as she ran from the
taxi to meet her camera crew.
wheres the girl? she shouted above the noise of helicopters and police
sirens.
there! shouted the producer while the sound engineer hurried to clip a radio
mike to her. she says her mother and father came from here in some parallel
dimension or something like that, and shes got her fathers watch, and... i
dont know. what can i tell you? busk it. ask her what it feels like to be
from outer space.
thanks a lot, ted, muttered tricia, checked that her mike was securely
clipped, gave the engineer some level, took a deep breath, tossed her hair back
and switched into her role of pro- fessional reporter, on home ground, ready
for anything.
at least, nearly anything.
she turned to look for the girl. that must be her, with the wild hair and wild
eyes. the girl turned towards her. and stared.
mother! she screamed, and started to hurl rocks at tricia.



daylight exploded around them. hot, heavy sun. a desert plain stretched out
ahead in a haze of heat. they thundered out into it.
jump! shouted ford prefect.
what? shouted arthur dent, holding on for dear life.
there was no reply.
what did you say? shouted arthur again, and then realised that ford
prefect was no longer there. he looked around in panic and started to slip.
realising he couldnt hold on any longer he pushed himself sideways as hard
as he could and rolled into a ball as he hit the ground, rolling, rolling away
from the pounding hooves.
what a day, he thought, as he started furiously coughing dust up out of his
lungs. he hadnt had a day as bad as this since the earth had been blown up.
he staggered up to his knees , and then up to his feet and started to run away.
he didnt know what from or what to, but running away seemed a prudent
move.
he ran straight into ford prefect who was standing there surveying the scene.
look, said ford. that is precisely what we need.
arthur coughed up some more dust, and wiped some other dust out of his hair
and eyes. he turned, panting, to look at what ford was looking at.
it didnt look much like the domain of a king, or the king, or any kind of
king. it looked quite inviting though.
first, the context. this was a desert world. the dusty earth was packed
hard and had neatly bruised every last bit of arthur that hadnt already been
bruised by the festivities of the previous night. some way ahead of them were
great cliffs that looked like sandstone, eroded by the wind and what little rain
presumably fell in those parts into wild and fantastic shapes, which matched
the fantastic shapes of the giant cacti that sprouted here and there from the
arid, orange landscape.164

chapter 23.

for a moment arthur dared to hope they had unexpectedly arrived in arizona
or new mexico or maybe south dakota, but there was plenty of evidence that
this was not the case.
the perfectly normal beasts, for a start, still thundering, still pounding. they
swept up in their tens of thousands from the far horizon, disappeared com-
pletely for about half a mile, then swept off, thundering and pounding to the
distant horizon opposite.
then there were the spaceships parked in front of the bar &amp; grill. ah.
the domain of the king bar &amp; grill. bit of an anti-climax, thought
arthur to himself.
in fact only one of the spaceships was parked in front of the domain of the
king bar &amp; grill. the other three were in a parking lot by the side of the
bar and grill. it was the one in front that caught the eye, though. wonderful
looking thing. wild fins all over it, far, far too much chrome all over the fins
and most of the actual
bodywork painted in a shocking pink. it crouched there like an immense brood-
ing insect and looked as if it was at any moment about to jump on something
about a mile away.
the domain of the king bar &amp; grill was slap bang in the middle of
where the perfectly normal beasts would be charging if they didnt take a mi-
nor transdimensional diversion on the way. it stood on its own, undisturbed.
an ordinary bar &amp; grill. a truckstop diner. somewhere in the middle
of nowhere. quiet. the domain of the king.
gonna buy that spaceship, said ford quietly.
buy it? said arthur. thats not like you. i thought you usually pinched
them.
sometimes you have to show a little respect, said ford.
probably have to show a little cash as well, said arthur. how the hell much
is that thing worth?
with a tiny movement, ford brought his dine-o-charge credit card up out
of his pocket. arthur noticed that the hand holding it was trembling very
slightly.
ill teach them to make me the restaurant critic... breathed ford.
what do you mean? asked arthur.
ill show you, said ford with a nasty glint in his eye.
lets go and run up a few expenses shall we?

couple beers, said ford, and, i dunno, a couple bacon rolls, whatever

you got, oh and that pink thing outside.
he flipped his card on the top of the bar and looked around casually.

165

there was a kind of silence.
there hadnt been a lot of noise before, but there was defi- nitely a kind of
silence now. even the distant thunder of the perfectly normal beasts carefully
avoiding the domain of the king seemed suddenly a little muted.
just rode into town, said ford as if nothing was odd about that or about
anything else. he was leaning against the bar at an extravagantly relaxed an-
gle.
there were about three other customers in the place, sitting at tables, nursing
beers. about three. some people would say there were exactly three, but it
wasnt that kind of a place, not the kind of a place that you felt like being that
specific in. there was some big guy setting up some stuff on the little stage
as well. old drum kit. couple guitars. country and western kind of stuff.
the barman was not moving very swiftly to get in fords order. in fact he
wasnt moving at all.
not sure that the pink things for sale, he said at last in the kind of accent
that went on for quite a long time.
sure it is, said ford. how much you want?
well...
think of a number, ill double it.
taint mine to sell, said the barman.
so, whose?
the barman nodded at the big guy setting up on the stage. big fat guy, mov-
ing slow, balding.
ford nodded. he grinned.
ok, he said. get the beers, get the rolls. keep the tab open.

arthur sat at the bar and rested. he was used to not knowing what was
going on. he felt comfortable with it. the beer was pretty good and made
him a little sleepy which he didnt mind at all. the bacon rolls were not bacon
rolls. they were perfectly normal beast rolls. he exchanged a few professional
roll-making remarks with the barman and just let ford get on with whatever
ford wanted to do.
ok, said ford, returning to his stool. its cool. we got the pink thing.
the barman was very surprised. hes selling it to you?
hes giving it to us for free, said ford, taking a gnaw at his roll. hey, no,
keep the tab open though. we have some items to add to it. good roll.
he took a deep pull of beer.
good beer, he added. good ship too, he said, eying the big pink and
chrome insect-like thing, bits of which could be seen through the windows of
the bar. good everything, pretty much. you know, he said, sitting back,

166

chapter 23.

reflectively, its at times like this that you kind of wonder if its worth wor-
rying about the fabric of space/time and the causal integrity of the multi-
dimensional probability matrix and the potential collapse of all wave forms in
the whole sort of general mish mash and all that sort of stuff thats been
bugging me. maybe i feel that what the big guy says is right. just let it all
go. what does it matter? let it go.
which big guy? said arthur.
ford just nodded towards the stage. the big guy was saying one two into
the mike a couple of times. couple other guys were on the stage now. drums.
guitar.
the barman, who had been silent for a moment or two, said, you say hes
letting you have his ship?
yeah, said ford. let it all go is what he said. take the ship. take it with
my blessing. be good to her. i will he good to her.
he took a pull at his beer again.
like i was saying, he went on. its at times like this that you kind of think,
let it all go. but then you think of guys like infinidim enterprises and you
think, they are not going to get away with it. they are going to suffer. it is
my sacred and holy duty to see those guys suffer. here, let me put something
on the tab for the singer. i asked for a special request and we agreed. its to
go on the tab. ok?
ok, said the barman, cautiously. then he shrugged. ok, however you
want to do it. how much?
ford named a figure. the barman fell over amongst the bottles and glasses.
ford vaulted quickly over the bar to check that he was all right and help him
back up to his feet. hed cut his finger and his elbow a bit and was feeling a
little woozy but was otherwise fine. the big guy started to sing. the barman
hobbled off with fords credit card to get authorisation.
is there stuff going on here that i dont know about? said arthur to ford.
isnt there usually? said ford.
no need to be like that, said arthur. he began to wake up. shouldnt we
be going? he said suddenly. will that ship get us to earth?
sure will, said ford.
thats where random will be going! said arthur with a start. we can
follow her! but... er...
ford let arthur get on with thinking things out for himself while he got out
his old edition of the hitch hikers guide to the galaxy.
but where are we on the probability axis thing? said arthur. will the
earth be there or not there? i spent so much time look- ing for it. all i found
was planets that were a bit like it or not at all like it, though it was clearly the

167

right place because of the continents. the worst version was called nowwhat
where i got bitten by some wretched little animal. thats how they commu-
nicated, you know, by biting each other. bloody painful. then half the time,
of course, the earth isnt even there because its been blown up by the bloody
vogons. how much sense am i making?
ford didnt comment. he was listening to something. he passed the guide
over to arthur and pointed at the screen. the active entry read earth. mostly
harmless.
you mean its there! said arthur excitedly. the earth is there! thats
where random will be going! the bird was showing her the earth in the rain-
storm!
ford motioned arthur to shout a little less loudly. he was listening.
arthur was growing impatient. hed heard bar singers sing love me tender
before. he was a bit surprised to hear it here, right in the middle of wherever
the hell this was, certainly not earth, but then things tended not to surprise
him these days as much as formerly. the singer was quite good, as bar singers
went, if you liked that sort of thing, but arthur was getting fretful.
he glanced at his watch. this only served to remind. him that he didnt have
his watch any more. random had it, or at least the remains of it.
dont you think we should be going? he said, insistently.
shhh! said ford. i paid to hear this song. he seemed to have tears in
his eyes, which arthur found a bit disturbing. hed never seen ford moved by
anything other than very, very strong drink. probably the dust. he waited,
tapping his fingers irritably, out of time with the music.
the song ended. the singer went on to do heartbreak hotel.
anyway, ford whispered, ive got to review the restaurant.
what?
i have to write a review.
write a review? of this place?
filing the review validates the expenses claim. ive fixed it so that it happens
completely automatically and untraceably. this bill is going to need some val-
idation, he added quietly, staring into his beer with a nasty smirk.
for a couple of beers and a roll?
and a tip for the singer.
why, how much did you tip him?
ford named a figure again.
i dont know how much that is, said arthur. whats it worth in pounds
sterling? what would it buy you?
it would probably buy you, roughly... er... ford screwed his eyes up as he
did some calculations in his head. switzerland, he said at last. he picked

168

chapter 23.

up his hitch hikers guide and started to type.
arthur nodded intelligently. there were times when he wished he understood
what on earth ford was talking about, and other times, like now, when he felt
it was probably safer not even to try. he looked over fords shoulder. this
isnt going to take long, is it? he said.
nah, said ford. piece of piss. just mention that the rolls were quite good,
the beer good and cold, local wildlife nicely eccentric, the bar singer the best
in the known universe, and thats about it. doesnt need much. just a vali-
dation.
he touched an area on the screen marked enter and the message vanished
into the sub-etha.
you thought the singer was pretty good then?
yeah, said ford. the barman was returning with a piece of paper, which
seemed to be trembling in his hand.
he pushed it over to ford with a kind of nervous, reverential twitch.
funny thing, said the barman. the system rejected it first couple times.
cant say it surprised me. beads of sweat were standing on his brow. then
suddenly its, oh yeah, thats ok, and the system... er, validates it. just like
that. you wanna ...sign it?
ford scanned the form quickly. he sucked his teeth. this is going to hurt
infinidim a lot, he said, with an appearance of concern. oh well, he added
softly, screw em.
he signed with a flourish and handed it back to the barman.
more money, he said, than the colonel made for him in an entire career of
doing crap movies and casino gigs. just for doing what he does best. standing
up and singing in a bar. and he negotiated it himself. i think this is a good
moment for him. tell him i said thanks and buy him a drink. he tossed a
few coins on the bar. the barman pushed them away.
i dont think thats necessary, he said, slightly hoarsely.
tis to me, said ford. ok, we are outa here.

they stood out in the heat and the dust and looked at the big pink and
chrome thing with amazement and admiration. or at least, ford looked at it
with amazement and admiration.
arthur just looked at it. you dont think its a bit overdone, do you?
he said it again when they climbed inside it. the seats and quite a lot of the
controls were covered in fine fur skin or suede. there was a big gold monogram
on the main control panel which just read ep.
you know, said ford as he fired up the ships engines, i asked him if it was
true that he had been abducted by aliens, and you know what he said?

169

who? said arthur.
the king.
which king? oh, weve had this conversation, havent we?
never mind, said ford. for what its worth, he said, no. he went of his
own accord.
im still not sure who were talking about, said arthur. ford shook his head.
look, he said, there are some tapes over in the compartment to your left.
why dont you choose some music and put it on?
ok, said arthur, and flipped through the cartons. do you like elvis pres-
ley? he said.
yeah i do as a matter of fact, said ford. now. i hope this machine can
leap like it looks like it can. he engaged the main drive.
yeeehaah! shouted ford as they shot upwards at face-tearing speed.
it could.

170

chapter 23.



the news networks dont like this kind of thing. they regard it as a waste. an
incontrovertible spaceship arrives out of nowhere in the middle of london and
it is sensational news of the highest magnitude. another completely different
one arrives three and a half hours later and somehow it isnt.
another spacecraft! said the headlines and news stand billboards.
this ones pink. a couple of months later they could have made a lot
more of it. the third spacecraft, half an hour after that, the little four berth
hrundi runabout, only made it on to the local news.
ford and arthur had come screaming down out of the strato- sphere and parked
neatly on portland place. it was just after six-thirty in the evening and there
were spaces free. they min- gled briefly with the crowd that gathered round
to ogle, then said loudly that if no one else was going to call the police they
would, and made good their escape.
home... said arthur, a husky tone creeping into his voice as he gazed, misty-
eyed around him.
oh dont get all maudlin on me, snapped ford. we have to find your
daughter and we have to find that bird thing.
how? said arthur. this is a planet of five and a half billion people, and...
yes, said ford. but only one of them has just arrived from outer space in
a large silver spaceship accompanied by a mechanical bird. i suggest we just
find a television and some- thing to drink while we watch it. we need some
serious room service.

they checked into a large two-bedroomed suite at the langham. mysteri-
ously, fords dine-o-charge card, issued on a planet over five thousand light
years away, seemed to present the hotels computer with no problems.
ford hit the phones straight away while arthur attempted to locate the tele-
vision.172

chapter 24.

its so bloody confusing.

ok, said ford. i want to order up some margaritas please. couple of
pitchers. couple of chefs salads. and as much foie gras as youve got. and
also london zoo.
shes on the news! shouted arthur from the next room.
thats what i said, said ford into the phone. london zoo. just charge it
to the room.
shes... good god! shouted arthur. do you know who shes being inter-
viewed by?
are you having difficulty understanding the english lan- guage? continued
ford. its the zoo just up the road from here. i dont care if its closed this
evening. i dont want to buy a ticket, i just want to buy the zoo. i dont care
if youre busy. this is room service, im in a room and i want some service.
got a piece of paper? ok. heres what i want you to do. all the animals that
can be safely returned to the wild, return them. set up some good teams of
people to monitor their progress in the wild, see that theyre doing ok.
its trillian! shouted arthur. or is it... er... god, i cant stand all this
parallel universe stuff.
it seems to be a different
trillian. its tricia mcmillan which is what trillian used to be called before...
er... why dont you come and watch, see if you can figure it out?
just a second, ford shouted, and returned to his negotia- tions with room
service. then well need some natural reserves for the animals that cant hack
it in the wild, he said. set up a team to work out the best places to do that.
we might need to buy somewhere like zaire and maybe some islands. mada-
gascar. baffin. sumatra. those kind of places. well need a wide variety
of habitats. look, l dont see why youre seeing this as a problem. learn to
delegate. hire whoever you want. get on to it. i think youll find my credit
is good. and blue cheese dressing on the salad. thank you.
he put the phone down and went through to arthur, who was sitting on the
edge of his bed watching television.
i ordered us some foie gras, said ford.
what? said arthur, whose attention was entirely focused on the television.
i said i ordered us some foie gras.
oh, said arthur, vaguely. um, i always feel a hit bad about foie gras. bit
cruel to the geese, isnt it?
fuck em, said ford, slumping on the bed. you cant care about every
damn thing.
well, thats all very well for you to say, but...
drop it! said ford. if you dont like it ill have yours. whats happening?
chaos! said arthur. complete chaos! random keeps on screaming at tril-
lian, or tricia or whoever it is, that she aban- doned her and then demanding

173

to go to a good night club. tricias broken down in tears and says shes never
even met random let alone given birth to her. then she suddenly started
howling about someone called rupert and said that he had lost his mind or
something. i didnt quite follow that bit, to be honest. then random started
throwing stuff and theyve cut to a commercial break while they try and sort
it all out. oh! theyve just cut back to the studio! shut up and watch.
a rather shaken anchorman appeared on the screen and apologised to viewers
for the disruption of the previous item. he said he didnt have any very clear
news to report, only that the mysterious girl, who called herself random fre-
quent flyer dent had left the studio to, er, rest. tricia mcmillan would be, he
hoped, back tomorrow. meanwhile, fresh reports of ufo activity were coming
in...
ford leaped up off the bed, grabbed the nearest phone and jabbed at a num-
ber.
concierge? you want to own the hotel? its yours if you can find out for me
in five minutes which clubs tricia mcmillan belongs to. just charge the whole
thing to this room.

174

chapter 24.



away in the inky depths of space invisible movements were being made.
invisible to any of the inhabitants of the strange and tem- peramental plural
zone at the focus of which lay the infinitely multitudinous possibilities of the
planet called earth, but not inconsequential to them.
at the very edge of the solar system, hunkered down on a green leatherette
sofa, staring fretfully at a range of tv and computer screens sat a very worried
grebulon leader. he was fiddling with stuff. fiddling with his book on as-
trology. fiddling with the console of his computer. fiddling with the displays
being fed through to him constantly from all of the grebulons monitoring
devices, all of them focused on the planet earth.
he was distressed. their mission was to monitor. but to monitor secretly. he
was a bit fed up with his mission, to be honest. he was fairly certain that
his mission must have been to do more than sit around watching tv for years
on end. they certainly had a lot of other equipment with them that must
have had some purpose if only they hadnt accidentally lost all trace of their
purpose. he needed a sense of purpose in life, which was why he had turned
to astrology to fill the yawning gulf that existed in the middle of his mind and
soul. that would tell him something, surely.
well, it was telling him something.
it was telling him, as far as he could make out, that he was about to have a
very bad month, that things were going to go from bad to worse if he didnt
get a grip on things and start making some positive moves and thinking things
out for himself.
it was true. it was very clear from his star chart which he had worked out using
his astrology book and the computer program which that nice tricia mcmillan
had designed for him to re-triangulate all the appropriate astronomical data.
earth-based astrology had to be entirely recalculated to yield results that were
meaningful to the grebulons here on the tenth planet out on the frozen edges176

chapter 25.

of the solar system.
the recalculations showed absolutely clearly and unamhigu- ously that he was
going to have a very bad month indeed, starting with today. because today
earth was starting to rise into capricorn, and that, for the grebulon leader,
who showed all the character signs of being a classic taurus, was very bad
indeed.
now was the time, his horoscope said, for taking positive actions, making
tough decisions, seeing what needed to be done and doing it. this was all very
difficult for him, but he knew that nobody ever said that doing tough stuff
wasnt tough. the com- puter was already tracking and predicting the second-
by-second location of the planet earth. he ordered the great grey turrets to
swivel.

because all of the grebulon surveillance equipment was focused on the
planet earth, it failed to spot that there was now another source of data in
the solar system.
its chances of spotting this other source of data - a massive yellow constructor
ship - accidentally were practically nil. it was as far from the sun as rupert
was, but almost diametrically opposite, almost hidden by the sun.
almost.
the massive yellow constructor ship wanted to be able to monitor events on
planet ten without being spotted itself. it had managed this very successfully.
there were all sorts of other ways in which this ship was diametrically opposite
to the grebulons.
its leader, its captain, had a very clear idea of what his purpose was. it was
a very simple and plain one and he had been pursuing it in his simple, plain
way for a considerable period of time now.
anyone who knew of his purpose might have said that it was a pointless and
ugly one, that it wasnt the sort of purpose that enhanced a life, put a spring
in a persons step, made birds sing and flowers bloom. rather the reverse in
fact. absolutely the reverse.
it wasnt his job to worry about that, though. it was his job to do his job,
which was to do his job.
if that led to a certain narrowness of vision and
circularity of thought then it wasnt his job to worry about such things. any
such things that came his way were referred to others who had, in turn, other
people to refer such things to.
many, many light years from here, indeed from anywhere, lies the grim and
long abandoned planet, vogsphere. some- where on a fetid, fog-bound mud
bank on this planet there stands, surrounded by the dirty, broken and empty
carapaces of the last few jeweled scuttling crabs, a small stone monument

177

which marks the place, where it is thought, the species vogon vogonblurtus
first arose. on the monument there is carved an arrow which points away into
the fog, under which are inscribed in plain, simple letters the words the buck
stops there.
deep in the bowels of his unsightly yellow ship, the vogon captain grunted as
he reached for a slightly faded and dog-eared piece of paper that lay in front
of him. a demolition order.
if you were to unravel exactly where the captains job, which was to do his
job which was to do his job, actually began, then it all came down at last to
this piece of paper that had been issued to him by his immediate superior long
ago. the piece of paper had an instruction on it, and his purpose was to carry
out that instruction and put a little tick mark in the adjacent box when he
had carried it out.
he had carried out the instruction once before, but a number of troublesome
circumstances had prevented him from being able to put the tick in the little
box.
one of the troublesome circumstances was the plural nature of this galactic
sector, where the possible continually interfered with the probable. simple
demolition didnt get you any further than pushing down a bubble under a
badly hung strip of wallpaper. anything you demolished kept on popping up
again. that would soon be taken care of.
another was a small bunch of people who continually refused to be where they
were supposed to be when they were supposed to be there. that, also, would
soon be taken care of.
the third was an irritating and anarchic little device called the hitch hikers
guide to the galaxy. that was now well and truly taken care of and, in fact,
through the phenomenal power of temporal reverse engineering, it was now
itself the agency through which everything else would be taken care of. the
captain had merely come to watch the final act of this drama. he himself did
not have to lift a finger.
show me, he said.
the shadowy shape of a bird spread its wings and rose into the air near him.
darkness engulfed the bridge. dim lights danced briefly in the black eyes of
the bird as, deep in its instructional address space, bracket after bracket was
final- ly closing, if clauses were finally ending, repeat loops halting, recursive
functions calling themselves for the last few times.
a brilliant vision lit up in the darkness, a watery blue and green vision, a tube
flowing through the air, shaped like a chopped up string of sausages.
with a flatulent noise of satisfaction, the vogon captain sat back to watch.

178

chapter 25.



just there, number forty-two, shouted ford prefect to the taxi-driver. right
here!
the taxi lurched to a halt, and ford and arthur jumped out. they had
stopped at quite a number of cash-dispensers on the way, and ford chucked a
fistful of money through the window at the driver.
the entrance to the club was dark, smart and severe. only the smallest little
plaque bore its name. members knew where it was, and if you werent a mem-
ber then knowing where it was wasnt any help to you.
ford prefect was not a member of stavros though he had once been to stavros
other club in new york. he had a very simple method of dealing with estab-
lishments of which he was not a member. he simply swept in as soon as the
door was opened, pointed back at arthur and said, its ok, hes with me.
he bounded down the dark glossy stairs, feeling very froody in his new shoes.
they were suede and they were blue, and he was very pleased that in spite
of everything else going on he had been sharp-eyed enough to spot them in a
shop window from the back of a speeding taxi.
i thought i told you not to come here.
what? said ford.
a thin, ill-looking man wearing something baggy and italian was walking up
the stairs past them, lighting a cigarette, and had stopped, suddenly.
not you, he said. him.
he looked straight at arthur, then seemed to become a little confused.
excuse me, he said. i think i must have mistaken you for someone else.
he started on up the stairs again , but almost immediately turned round once
more, even more puzzled. he stared at arthur.
now what? said ford.
what did you say?
i said, now what? repeated ford irritably.180

chapter 26.

yes, i think so, said the man and swayed slightly and dropped the book of
matches hed been carrying. his mouth moved weakly. then he put his hand
to his forehead.
excuse me, he said, im trying desperately to remember which drug ive
just taken, but it must be one of those ones which mean you cant remember.
he shook his head and turned away again, and went up towards the mens
room.
come on, said ford. he hurried on downstairs, with arthur following ner-
vously in his wake. the encounter had shaken him badly and he didnt know
why.
he didnt like places like this. for all of the dreams of earth and home he had
had for years, he now badly missed his hut on lamuella with his knives and
his sandwiches. he even missed old thrashbarg.
arthur!
it was the most astounding effect. his name was being shouted in stereo.
he twisted to look one way. up the stairs behind him he saw trillian hurrying
down towards him in her wonderfully rumpled rymplon tm. she was looking
suddenly aghast.
he twisted the other way to see what she was looking suddenly aghast at.
at the bottom of the stairs was trillian, wearing... no - this was tricia. tricia
that he had just seen, hysterical with confusion, on television. and behind her
was random, looking more wild-eyed than ever. behind her in the recesses of
the smart, dimly lit club, the other clientele of the evening formed a frozen
tableau, staring anxiously up at the confrontation on the stairs.
for a few seconds everyone stood stock still. only the music from behind the
bar didnt know to stop throbbing.
the gun she is holding, said ford quietly, nodding slightly towards random,
is a wabanatta 3. it was in the ship she stole from me. its quite dangerous
in fact. just dont move for a moment. lets just everybody stay calm and
find out whats upsetting her.
where do i fit? screamed random suddenly. the hand holding the gun was
trembling fiercely. her other hand delved into her pocket and pulled out the
remains of arthurs watch. she shook it at them.
i thought i would fit here, she cried, on the world that made me! but it
turns out that even my mother doesnt know who i am! she flung the watch
violently aside, and it smashed into the glasses behind the bar, scattering its
innards.
everyone was very quiet for a moment or two longer.
random, said trillian quietly from up on the stairs.
shut up! shouted random. you abandoned me!

181

random, it is very important that you listen to me and understand, per-
sisted trillian quietly. there isnt very much time. we must leave. we must
all leave.
what are you talking about? were always leaving! she had both hands on
the gun now, and both were shaking. there was no one in particular she was
pointing it at. she was just pointing it at the world in general.
listen, said trillian again. i left you because i went to cover a war for the
network.
it was extremely dangerous . at least, i thought it was going to
be. i arrived and the war had suddenly ceased to happen. there was a time
anomaly and...
listen! please listen! a reconnaissance battleship had failed
to turn up, the rest of the fleet was scattered in some farcical disarray. its
happening all the time now.
i dont care! i dont want to hear about your bloody job! shouted random.
i want a home! i want to fit somewhere!
this is not your home, said trillian, still keeping her voice calm. you dont
have one. we none of us have one. hardly anybody has one any more. the
missing ship i was just talking about. the people of that ship dont have a
home. they dont know where they are from. they dont even have any mem-
ory of who they are or what they are for. they are very lost and very confused
and very frightened. they are here in this solar system, and they are about to
do something very... misguided because they are so lost and confused. we...
must... leave ... now. i cant tell you where there is to go to. perhaps there
isnt anywhere. but here is not the place to be. please. one more time. can
we go?
random was wavering in panic and confusion.
its all right, said arthur gently. if im here, were safe. dont ask me to
explain just now, but i am safe, so you are safe. ok?
what are you saying? said trillian.
lets all just relax, said arthur. he was feeling very tranquil. his life was
charmed and none of this seemed real.
slowly, gradually, random began to relax, and to let the gun down, inch by
inch.
two things happened simultaneously.
the door to the mens room at the top of the stairs opened, and the man who
had accosted arthur came out, sniffing.
startled at the sudden movement, random lifted the gun again just as a man
standing behind her made a grab for it.
arthur threw himself forward. there was a deafening explo- sion. he fell awk-
wardly as trillian threw herself down over him. the noise died away. arthur
looked up to see the man at the top of the stairs gazing down at him with a

182

chapter 26.

look of utter stupefaction.
you... he said. then slowly, horribly, he fell apart.
random threw the gun down and fell to her knees, sobbing. im sorry! she
said. im so sorry! im so, so sorry...
tricia went to her. trillian went to her.
arthur sat on the stairs with his head between his hands and had not the
faintest idea what to do. ford was sitting on the stair beneath him. he picked
something up, looked at it with interest, and passed it up to arthur.
this mean anything to you? he said.
arthur took it. it was the book of matches which the dead man had dropped.
it had the name of the club on it. it had the name of the proprietor of the
club on it. it looked like this:

stavro mueller

beta

he stared at it for some time as things began slowly to reassemble them-
selves in his mind. he wondered what he should do, but he only wondered it
idly. around him people were beginning to rush and shout a lot, but it was
suddenly very clear to him that there was nothing to be done, not now or ever.
through the new strangeness of noise and light he could just make out the
shape of ford prefect sitting back and laughing wildly.
a tremendous feeling of peace came over him. he knew that at last, for once
and for ever, it was now all, finally, over.

in the darkness of the bridge at the heart of the vogon ship, prostetnic
vogon jeltz sat alone. lights flared briefly across the external vision screens
that lined one wall. in the air above him the discontinuities in the blue and
green watery sausage shape resolved themselves. options collapsed, possibili-
ties folded into each other, and the whole at last resolved itself out of existence.
a very deep darkness descended. the vogon captain sat immersed in it for a
few seconds.
light he said.
there was no response. the bird, too, had crumpled out of all possibility.
the vogon turned on the light himself. he picked up the piece of paper again
and placed a little tick in the little box. well, that was done. his ship slunk
off into the inky void.

in spite of having taken what he regarded as an extremely positive piece
of action, the grebulon leader ended up having a very bad month after all.

it was pretty much the same as all the previous months except that there was
now nothing on the television any more. he put on a little light music instead.